California Law Review

Volume 97 | Issue 1

2-28-2009

Against Moral Rights

Amy M. Adler
amy.adler@nyu.edu

Article 6

Follow this and additional works at: http://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/californialawreview

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Amy M. Adler, Against Moral Rights, 97 Cal. L. Rev. 263 (2009).
Available at: http://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/californialawreview/vol97/iss1/6

Link to publisher version (DOI)
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.15779/Z380X3H

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the California Law Review at Berkeley Law Scholarship Repository. It has been accepted for
inclusion in California Law Review by an authorized administrator of Berkeley Law Scholarship Repository. For more information, please contact
jcera@law.berkeley.edu.

Against  Moral Rights

Amy M.  Adler't*

"Art has become a  synonym for the destruction  of art."

"[T]o  imagine  a new art,  one must break the  ancient  art."

-Marcel  Schwob2

-Bruno  Latour'

"A  picture  is a sum of its destructions."

- Picasso

3

INTRODUCTION

Normally  when  you buy  something,  you  can do  what you want  with  it.  If
you  buy a  chair,  or  a  dress,  or  a  car,  you  can  alter  it,  embellish  it,  neglect  it,
abuse  it,  destroy  it,  or  throw  it  away.  But  if you  buy  a  work  of  art,  your
freedom to do what you want with that object-your own property-is  severely
curtailed.  This  is  because  artists  have  powerful  special  rights,  called  "moral

Copyright  ©  2009  California  Law Review,  Inc.  California  Law Review,  Inc.  (CLR) is  a
California  nonprofit  corporation.  CLR  and  the  authors  are  solely  responsible  for  the  content  of
their publications.

t  Professor  of  Law,  N.Y.U.  School  of  Law.  For  helpful  conversations  or  generous
comments on previous  drafts, or both,  I  would like to thank: Cynthia Adler,  David Adler,  Jonathan
Adler,  Sam  Ball,  Matthew  Benjamin,  Bennett  Capers,  Susan  Crawford,  Anne  Dailey,  Rochelle
Dreyfuss,  Barry Friedman,  Abner  Greene,  Moshe  Halbertal,  Charles  Halpern,  Andy  Koppelman,
Christopher  Kutz,  Roberta  Kwall,  Jessica  Litman,  Kyle  Logue,  Chase  Madar,  Willajeanne
McLean,  James  Meyer,  Rick  Pildes,  Judith  Prowda,  Anthony  Reese,  Lenn  Robbins,  Seana
Shiffrin,  Geoffrey  Stone,  Yofi  Tirosh,  Rebecca  Tushnet,  Steven  Wilf,  Katrina  Wyman,  Donn
Zaretsky, and  Diane Zimmerman.  I  would  also like  to thank  the  participants  in faculty  workshops
at U.C.  Berkeley,  the  University  of Michigan,  U.C.L.A.,  the  University  of  Connecticut,  N.Y.U
School  of Law, the  Hosier  Scholar  Series  at DePaul  and  Sotheby's  Institute of Fine  Arts.  Thanks*
to Julie  Ehrlich, Nicole Field, Peter Nelson,  Charlotte  Taylor, David Young,  and Dylan  Yaeger  for
outstanding  research assistance. The  D'Agostino/Greenberg Fund  provided generous  support.

* 

In  keeping  with  the  conventions  of the  Essay  format,  the  footnotes  in  this  piece  are
relatively sparse.  I  would be pleased  to provide a  fuller  list of sources  or a fuller  explication  of my
arguments to anyone who  writes to me  at amy.adler@nyu.edu.

1.  BRUNO  LATOUR,  ICONOCLASH:  BEYOND  THE  IMAGE  WARS  IN  SCIENCE  RELIGION  AND

ART  21  (Bruno Latour & Peter Weibel eds.,  2002).

2.  DARIO  GAMBONI,  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  ART 257  (2004).
3.  Christian  Zervos,  Conversations avec Picasso, CAHIERS  D'ART,  1935,  at  173,  175  (quote

translated from  the original  French by  Amy Adler).

CALIFORNIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

rights,"  unlike  the  creators  of other  objects.  Moral  rights  allow  an  artist  to
control  what  you  do with  his work  of art  even  after  he  has  sold  it and  even  if
you  are  not  in  privity  of contract  with  him.  European  in  origin,  moral  rights
have  been  part  of U.S.  federal  law  since  the  enactment  of the  Visual  Artists
Rights  Act of 1990 ("VARA"),  an amendment  to the Copyright Act.4

Moral  rights  scholarship  is  startling  in  its  uniformity.  Scholars  take  it as
gospel that  moral  rights  are  crucial  for art  to  flourish  and that,  if anything,  we
need  a  more  robust  moral  rights  doctrine. 5 Commentators  routinely  lament  the
gap  between  our  modest American  moral  rights  laws  and  the  more  expansive
European ones.6 In  contrast  to  copyright  law,  which  has  produced  a  vibrant
body  of scholarship  critical  of the  law's excesses,  the  main scholarly  criticism
of moral  rights  is  that  they  do  not  reach  far  enough.7  Wading  through  the
largely  repetitive  law  review  literature,  it doesn't  take  long  to  get  the  implicit
message:  if you  don't  support  moral  rights,  you're  a  philistine  who  doesn't

4.  Visual Artists  Rights Act  of 1990,  17  U.S.C.  §  106A  (2000).  For a  discussion  of various

state  statutes  enacted  prior to VARA,  see  infra note  12  and accompanying  text.

5. 

For just a few  examples  of important  scholarship  on  moral rights,  see  Roberta  R. Kwall,
Inspiration and Innovation: The Intrinsic Dimension of the Artistic Soul, 81  NOTRE DAME  L. REV.
1945,  1986  (2006)  [hereinafter  Kwall,  Inspiration]; Roberta  R.  Kwall,  "Author-Stories":
Narrative's Implications for Moral Rights and Copyright's Joint Authorship Doctrine, 75  S.  CAL.
L.  REV.  1 (2001)  (describing  the  urgent  importance  of moral  rights  as  a  way  to  encourage  the
creative  process)  [hereinafter  Kwall,  Author Stories]; Susan  P.  Liemer,  Understanding Artists'
Moral Rights:  A  Primer, 7  B.U.  PUB. INT.  L.J.  41,  41-42,  44  (1998);  John  H.  Merryman,  The
Refrigerator of  Bernard Buffet,  27  HASTINGS  L.J.  1023  (1976)  (pre-VARA  article  urging
American  adoption  of  moral  rights).  See  generally  JOSEPH  SAX,  PLAYING  DARTS  WITH  A
REMBRANDT:  PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  RIGHTS  IN  CULTURAL  TREASURES  (1999)  (explaining  the
urgent public  interest in preserving  important cultural  objects,  including art).

6. 

See,  e.g.,  Jane  C.  Ginsburg,  Have Moral Rights  Come  of (Digital) Age  in  the  United
States?,  19  CARDOZO  ARTS  &  ENT.  L.J.  9  (2001);  Kwall,  Author  Stories, supra note  5,  at  22;
Roberta  R. Kwall,  The  Attribution Right in  the  United States:  Caught in  the  Crossfire Between
Copyright and Section  43(A),  77  WASH.  L.  REV. 985  (2002);  Roberta  R.  Kwall,  How Fine Art
Fares Post VARA,  1 MARQ.  INTELL.  PROP.  L.  REV. 1  (1997)  [hereinafter  Kwall,  How Fine Art
Fares Post VARA];  Robert  J.  Sherman,  Note,  The  Visual Artists Rights Act  of 1990: American
Artists Burned Again, 17  CARDOZO  L.  REV. 373,  416-17  (1995).  Cf  Lior Jacob  Strahilevitz,  The
Right To Destroy, 114  YALE  L.J.  781,  853  (2005)  (praising VARA's  "balanced  and  sophisticated
approach").  Several  important  articles  predating  VARA  urged  the  United  States  to  adopt  moral
rights  laws.  See  Edward  J.  Damich,  The  Right  of  Personality: A  Common-Law  Basis for
Protection of the Moral Rights ofAuthors, 23  GA.  L. REV. 1 (1988);  Roberta  R. Kwall,  Copyright
and the Moral Right: Is an American Marriage Possible?, 38  VAND.  L. REV.  1 (1985).

For one  of a handful  of articles  criticizing  VARA  from  a  free  speech perspective,  see  Eric E.
Bensen,  Note,  The  Visual Artist's Rights Act  of 1990:  Why  Moral Rights Cannot be  Protected
Under the United States Constitution, 24 HOFSTRA  L. REV.  1127  (1996).

7. 

See,  e.g.,  Robert  C.  Bird,  Moral Rights: Diagnosis and Rehabilitation (Nov.  27,  2007)
http://ssm.com/abstract=1033021  (predominant  trend  in  scholarship  urges  "adopting...  stronger
protection  of [moral]  rights  in the  United  States").  Even  the  fiercest,  most  influential  copyright
critic,  Lawrence  Lessig,  has  refrained  from  criticizing  moral  rights.  Lessig  wrote:  "I  don't  see
where  I've  ever  said  anything  against  moral  rights  .... [T]he  moral rights  tradition  has  actually
proven  to  be  an  important  check  on  .. .publishers."  Lessig  Blog:  On  the  Challenge  of Moral
Rights,  http://lessig.org/blog/2005/02/on  he challenge-of  moral-righ.html  (Feb.  26,  2005,  8:30
a.m.).

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

understand  the sanctity of art.

This essay  seeks to undermine  the  foundations  of moral rights  scholarship,
law,  and  theory.  My  argument  is  that  moral  rights  laws  endanger  art  in  the
name of protecting it. Drawing  on contemporary  art theory  and practice,  I  focus
on  the  moral  right  of  "integrity,"  called  "the  heart  of  the  moral  rights
doctrine."  This  right  allows  an  artist  to  prevent  modification  and,  in  some
cases, destruction  of his art work.  As  I show,  the  right  of integrity  threatens  art
because  it  fails  to  recognize  the  profound  artistic  importance  of  modifying,
even  destroying,  works  of art,  and  of freeing  art  from the  control  of the  artist.
Ultimately,  I  question  the  most  basic  premise  of moral  rights  law:  that  law
should  treat visual  art as a  uniquely prized  category  that  merits exceptions  from
the normal rules  of property and contract.

To  put  it mildly,  this  is  not  a  popular  argument.  Indeed,  it challenges  the
key  assumptions  of  virtually  all  moral  rights  scholarship.  But  moral  rights
scholars  have  overlooked  a  surprising  problem: 
the  conception  of  "art"
embedded  in moral rights law  has  become  obsolete.  As a  result,  the  law  is  on  a
collision  course  with  the  very  art  it  seeks  to  defend.  In  fact,  as  I  will  show,
moral  rights  are  premised  on  the  precise  conception  of "art"  that  artists  have
been  rebelling  against  for the  last forty  years.  Moral  rights  law  thus  purports  to
protect  art, but does  so by  enshrining a vision  of art that  is directly  at  odds with
contemporary  artistic  practice.  It protects  and reifies  a notion  of art that  is  dead.
In this  Essay  I ask  the  question:  does  moral  rights  law  make  sense  in  an  era  in
which  "art,"  at  least  as we  have known it for centuries,  is  over?

My  goal  is  to  provoke  us  to  rethink  our  fundamental  assumptions  about
moral  rights  law.  Rather  than  offering a  detailed  proposal  for legal  reform,  this
Essay  attacks  the  very  foundations  of the  law.  Part  I  offers  a brief introduction
to  moral rights  doctrine  in  the  United  States, and  outlines  the  doctrine's  major
theoretical  tenets. Parts  II  and  III  set  forth  my claim  that  moral  rights  endanger
art  in  the  name  of protecting  it.  Specifically,  Part  II  challenges  the  premise  in
moral  rights  law  that the  artist  is  the  proper person  in whom we  should  vest  the
power  to  enforce  moral  rights.  Here  I  dispute  the  pivotal  assumption  in moral
rights  law that  an  artist's  interests  and the public's  interest  in a  work  of art will
be  aligned.  Ultimately  I  question  the  romantic  assumptions  about  authorship
and  meaning  embedded  in  moral  rights  law.  In  my  view,  these  assumptions
threaten  to  freeze  the  vitality  of artistic  discourse.  Part  III  in  turn argues  that
moral  rights  law  obstructs  rather  than  enables  the  creation  of art  because  the
law  fails  to  recognize  the  defining  role  that  destruction  has  come  to  play  in
contemporary  artistic  practice.  In Part  IV, I challenge  the most basic  premise  of
moral  rights  law:  that  visual  art  is  an  exalted  and  distinct  category  of property

8.  Kwall,  How Fine Art Fares Post VARA,  supra note  6; see also Neil Netanel,  Alienability
Restrictions  and  the  Enhancement  of  Author  Autonomy  in  United  States  and  Continental
Copyright Law,  12  CARDOZO  ARTS  & ENT.  L.J.  1, 37  (1994)  ("The  right  of integrity  is  generally
seen as the  central  tenet  of moral rights jurisprudence.").

CALIFORNIA  LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

that deserves  special legal  treatment.

A  note  about  the  definition  of "art":  I use  the  term "art"  to describe  work
that  critics,  scholars,  galleries,  museums,  and  "artists"  generally  discuss  as
"art."  But  I  also  use  the  term  "art"  to  include  works  that  make  us  ask  the
question  "what  is  art?"  in the  first place. 9  By using  the term  so broadly,  I mean
to illustrate  a  central  point  of this piece:  attacks  by  "artists"  on  the  category  of
"art"  have at once  constituted and begun to destroy  the meaning  of that term.10

I

THE RATIONALES  FOR  MORAL  RIGHTS

A  Brief Introduction to  U.S. Moral Rights Doctrine

Moral  rights  were  only  recently  and  grudgingly  accepted  in  the  United
States.  The  concept of moral rights  originated in nineteenth  century France  and
has  long  been  recognized  by  most  civil  law  countries.  Moral  rights  are  a
centerpiece  of the  international  Berne  Convention  for the Protection  of Literary
and  Artistic  Works,11  which  the  United  States  resisted  signing  for years  in part
because  of the moral  rights provision  in the  Convention.  In the  interim,  several
states  filled  the  gap;  led  in  1979  by  California,  eleven  states  enacted  various
forms  of moral  rights  protections  for  visual  artists.' 2  Eventually,  in  1988,  the
United  States  ratified  the  Berne  Convention. 13  Two  years  later,  Congress
enacted VARA  as an  amendment to the Copyright  Act.14

VARA  grants three  basic  moral  rights  to artists who  create  "visual  art,"  a
narrowly  defined  statutory  category  that  I  describe  below.  The  first  and most
important  moral right  is  the  right of "integrity"  of the  work of art,  which  grants
an  artist  "the  right  ... 
to prevent  any intentional  distortion,  mutilation, or other
modification  of that  work  which  would  be  prejudicial  to  his  or  her  honor  or
reputation,  and  any  intentional  distortion,  mutilation,  or  modification  of that
work  is  a violation  of that  right.' 5  The  second  right, which  I  do  not address  in
any  depth  in  this  Essay,  is  traditionally  known  as  the  right  of "paternity"  or

9. 

I discuss  this  in  depth  in Amy Adler,  The Folly of Defining "Serious " Art, in THE  NEW
IN  THE  ARTS  90  (Christopher

GATEKEEPERS:  EMERGING  CHALLENGES  TO  FREE  EXPRESSION 
Hawthorne,  Andrfs  Szdnt6  et  al. eds., 2003).

10.  As  I  will  show, these  attacks  include  both  conceptual  attacks  on the  category  of "art,"

and physical  attacks  on  works  of art.

11.  Berne  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Literary  and  Artistic  Works,  art.  6bis,  as
amended on  Sept. 28,  1979,  S.  Treaty Doc.  No. 99-27,  1161  U.N.T.S.  3. Article  6bis became  part
of the Convention  in 1928.

12. 

For a discussion of the  state statutes  and  the  extent to which VARA  preempts them,  see

WILLIAM F.  PATRY,  4 PATRY  ON  COPYRIGHT  §  16:44  (2007).

13.  Congress  passed  the  Beme  Convention  Implementation  Act of  1988,  Pub.  L.  No.  100-

568,  102  Stat.  2853  (1988)  (codified as  amended in scattered  sections of 17  U.S.C.)

14.  Visual Artists  Rights Act  of 1990,  17  U.S.C. §  106A  (2000).
15. 

Id. § 106A  (a)(3)(A).

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

"attribution."  It allows the  artist to  insist that his work  be properly  attributed  to
him  and that  works  not  be  misattributed  to  him. 6  Finally,  to  artists  who  have
created  works  of visual  art  that are  "of recognized  stature,"  VARA  expands  the
right  of  integrity,  allowing  the  artist  to  prevent  not  merely  modification  but
outright destruction  of the  work.17

What  qualifies  as  a  work  of "visual  art"  for  purposes  of  VARA?  The
statute  defines  visual  art  to  include  "a  painting,  drawing,  print,  or  sculpture,
existing  in a  single  copy,  or in a  limited  edition of 200  copies  or fewer that  are
signed  and  consecutively  numbered  by  the  author."' 8  The  definition  includes
photography  that  has  been  "produced  for  exhibition  purposes  only"  and  exists
"in  a  single  copy  that  is  signed  by  the  author,  or  in  a  limited  edition  of 200
copies  or  fewer  that  are  signed  and  consecutively  numbered  by  the  author."', 9
VARA  explicitly  excludes  from  its  definition  of  visual  art  a  number  of
materials  such  as  motion  pictures,  audiovisual  works,  books,  magazines,
electronic  publications,  and  advertising  or promotional  materials. 20  And,  aside
from  a  few  exceptions,  VARA  applies  only  to  visual  art  created  after  its

16. 

Id. §  106A  (a)(1).  This Essay focuses  on the  right of integrity,  which is  considered  to be
the  central  moral right,  and  not on  the  right  of attribution.  Nonetheless,  I want  to  briefly note that
the  right  of attribution,  while  not unproblematic,  see,  e.g.,  infra note  201,  can  serve  some  of the
same  goals  as the  integrity  right  while  avoiding  the  major  problems  addressed  in  this  Essay.  By
allowing an  artist to remove  his name  from  a modified  artwork,  the right of attribution protects  the
artist's  reputational  interest  while  not  interfering  with  the  public  interest  in  modification.  The
mutilated work,  a new  and potentially  valuable  work  of art, can  still exist, but the  artist can protect
his reputation  (albeit  imperfectly)  by choosing  to disassociate  himself from  the altered  work.

17. 

Id. §  106A(a)(3)(B).  VARA  does  not  define  "recognized  stature."  For a  few  opinions
interpreting  the  term's  meaning,  see  Martin v.  City of Indianapolis,  192  F.3d  608  (7th  Cir.  1999);
Scott  v.  Dixon,  309  F.  Supp.  2d 395  (E.D.N.Y.  2004);  Pollara  v.  Seymour,  150  F.  Supp.  2d  393
(N.D.N.Y.  2001);  Carter  v.  Helmsley-Spear,  Inc.,  861  F.  Supp.  303  (S.D.N.Y.  1994),  rev'd on
other grounds, 71  F.3d  77 (2d  Cir. 1995).

The  right to prevent  destruction  is  not universal  in civil  law  countries. See  Carter, 71  F.3d at
81.  This  variation illustrates  the  different purposes  that moral rights  laws  serve.  To the extent that
the  right  of integrity  serves primarily  to  protect the  artist's  reputational  interest, destruction  tends
not  to  be  prevented;  the  theory  is  that  continued  display  of  mutilated  work  misrepresents  an
artist's  intention  and  thus  harms  him  more  than  if  the  work  were  destroyed  altogether.  To  the
extent  that  the  right  of integrity  is  seen  as  primarily  protecting  the  public  interest  in  preserving
cultural  heritage,  destruction  is prohibited.

18. 

17  U.S.C.  §  101.  The  statute protects  "multiple  cast,  carved,  or fabricated  sculptures  of
200  or  fewer  that  are  consecutively  numbered  by  the  author  and  bear  the  signature  or  other
identifying  mark  of the  author."  Id.  VARA's  legislative  history  directs  courts  to  "use  common
sense  and  generally  accepted  standards  of  the  artistic  community  in  determining  whether  a
particular  work  falls  within  the  scope  of the  definition."  H.R.  REP.  No.  101-514,  at  11  (1990),
reprinted in  1990  U.S.C.C.A.N.  6915,  6921.  But  my argument  in Part IV  suggests  that in light of
the  direction  of  contemporary  art,  "common  sense"  and  "generally  accepted  standards  of  the
artistic community"  could  lead to opposite  outcomes.

19. 
20. 

17  U.S.C.  §  101.
Id. For  some  cases  finding  material  did  not  meet  the  definition  of "visual  art"  under
VARA,  see  Nat'l Ass'n for Stock  Car Auto  Racing, Inc.  v. Scharle,  356  F.  Supp. 2d  515  (E.D.  Pa.
2005);  Lilley v.  Stout, 384  F. Supp.  2d  83 (D.D.C. 2005);  Pollara, 344  F.3d  265.

Section  113(d)  of  VARA  makes  special  provisions  for  works  attached  to  buildings;  this

category raises  a particular  set  of problems.  17  U.S.C. §  113(d).

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

effective  date, June  1, 1991. 21

European  moral  rights  laws  are  far  more  extensive  than  their  U.S.
in  a  number  of  important  ways.22  Most  prominently,  many
counterparts 
European  countries  grant  artists  other  moral  rights  in  addition  to  integrity  and
paternity. 23 Most  recognize  a  right  of divulgation,  giving  the  artist the  right to
decide  when  (and  whether)  the  work  is  complete  and  can  be  shown. 24  The
rights can  even extend  to allowing  an  artist to  compel construction  of a not-yet-
built, commissioned  work.  For example,  Jean  Dubuffet  sued Renault  to force  it
to  construct  a  2,000  square  foot  "environmental  sculpture"  designed  by  the
artist  on  a  commission  from the  company.  A  French  Court  ordered  Renault  to
complete  the  sculpture,  even  though  Dubuffet  had  received  his  fee. 25  French
law  also  provides  a  "right  to repent  or  retake"  a  work  at  any  time  in  exchange
for  payment. 26  In  addition,  moral  rights  in  most  countries  are  inalienable; 27  in
28
In  contrast,  under  VARA,  moral  rights  are
France  the  rights  are  perpetual. 
waivable  and endure  only for the  life  of the  artist.29

Unlike  those  countries,  the  United  States  has  never  fully  embraced  moral
rights.  VARA  extends  to  a  limited  class  of material.  Critics  lament  that  even
within  that  limited  class,  VARA  is  under-enforced;  courts  tend  to  read  the
statute  narrowly.  Because  of  this  and  other  pressures,  legal  scholars  have

See infra note 29.

21. 
22.  For  a  comparative  analysis  of U.S.  and European  moral  rights,  see  Netanel,  supra note
8;  Cyrill  P.  Rigamonti,  Deconstructing Moral Rights, 47  HARV.  INT'L  L.J.  353  (2006);  Martin  A.
Roeder,  The  Doctrine of Moral Right: A  Study  in the Law of Artists, Authors  and Creators, 53
HARV.  L.  REV.  554,  557  (1940).  John  Merryman's  1976  article,  supra note  5,  was  profoundly
influential  on American  scholars.

23.  European  moral  rights  doctrine  is  broader  in  scope  than VARA,  sometimes  extending
to reproductions  of original works.  See,  e.g.,  Bernard-Rousseau  v. Galeries  Lafayette,  Tribunal de
grande  instance  [T.G.I.]  [ordinary court  of original jurisdiction],  Mar.  13,  1973,  J.C.P.  1974,  IV,
48,  at  224  (Fr.).  New  York  moral  rights  law  also  extends  to reproductions.  See  Wojnarowicz  v.
Am.  Family  Ass'n.,  745 F.  Supp.  130 (S.D.N.Y.  1990).

JOHN  H.  MERRYMAN  &  ALBERT  ELSEN,  LAW,  ETHICS  AND  THE  VISUAL  ARTS  423  (5th

24. 

ed.  2007).

25. 

Id.  at  443  (describing  Dubuffet  v.  Renault,  Supreme  Court  of  Cassation.)  Dubuffet
didn't enforce  the judgment.  Compare Flack v.  Friends  of Queen  Catherine  Inc.,  139  F.  Supp.  2d
526,  535  (S.D.N.Y.  2001)  (denying  artist's  VARA  claim  to  have  commissioned  sculpture
completed).  In  the  recent  litigation  between  Christoph  Buchel  and  Mass  Moca,  the  court  found
in  that  case.  Mass.  Museum  of
VARA  inapplicable  to 
Contemporary  Art  Found.,  Inc.  v. Buchel,  No. 07-30089-MAP,  2008  WL  2755842,  at  *13  (D.
Mass. July  11,  2008).

the  unfinished  sculpture  at  issue 

See Netanel, supra note 8,  at 2.

26.  MERRYMAN  & ELSEN,  supra note 24,  at 423.
27. 
28.  This  is  true  in  some  other  civil  law  countries.  Adolf Dietz,  The  Moral Right of the
Author:  Moral Rights and the Civil Law Countries, 19  COLUM.-VLA  J.L.  & ARTS  199,  213-217
(1995).

29.  This  applies  to  artworks  created  after  the  effective  date  of  VARA,  June  1,  1991.  17
U.S.C.  §  106A(d)  (2000).  Works  created  prior  to  that  date  but  not  transferred  enjoy  longer
protection:  life  of  the  author  plus  70  years  (copyright  term).  VARA  does  not  apply  to  works
created  and  transferred  prior to  the  effective  date.  Cf  California Art  Preservation  Act,  CAL.  CIv.
CODE  § 987 (West  2006)  (granting rights for  life plus  fifty years).

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

increasingly  called  for the expansion  U.S. moral rights. 30

B. Moral Rights Theory

Why do  we wish to preserve  the integrity  of art?  And why do we  grant moral
rights  only  to  the  rarified  category  of  "visual  art"  and  not  to  other  objects?
Embedded  in moral  rights law  are  two basic  assumptions  about  visual art. First
is  that  a  work  of  art  is  an  extension  of  the  artist  himself.  I  use  the  term
"himself'  rather than "herself'  advisedly  because  of the  language of "paternity"
that  is  a  refrain  in  moral  rights  scholarship. 3 1 Scholars  invoke  the  metaphor  of
paternity  to  explain  the  artist's profound  connection  with  his  work:  he  cares  so
deeply  about  the  fate  of his  art  because  it  is  somehow  his  child  and  not just
another  object.32  Thus  the  artist  feels  personal  anguish  when  someone  else
modifies  his  artwork/child.  This  is  so  even  though  the  child  has  grown  up  and
left  home,  and  even  though  the  artist/father  has  sold his  child  (more  about
commerce  later).33  The  work  of art  is  not just  another  product he  has  sold, but
rather  an  "expression  of  his  innermost  being."3 4  As  the  Second  Circuit
observed,  moral  rights  "spring  from  a  belief  that  an  artist  in  the  process  of
creation  injects his  spirit into  the work. 35

Indeed,  moral  rights  advocates  sometimes  speak  of art  works  as  if they
were  living  things:  "To  mistreat  the  work  is  to  mistreat  the  artist." 36  It is  as  if
the  work  has  a  magical  connection  to its  maker;  hurting  the piece  will  hurt  the
artist  as if you  were sticking  pins in  a  voodoo  doll.  Because  of this emphasis  on
the  artist's  (and  indeed,  the  art's)  personhood,  moral  rights  are  said  to  have  a
"spiritual,  non-economic  and personal nature." 37

The  second  assumption  embedded  in  moral  rights  law,  deeply  related  to
the  first, is  that  works of visual  art deserve  special  treatment in the  law because
they  are  especially  valuable  and  unlike  other  objects.  As  a  prominent  French

30.  See,  e.g.,  Bird,  supra note  7  (surveying  scholarship  and  finding  predominant  trend

urges "stronger  protection  of rights  in the  United States").

31.  On  this  and other points,  moral rights law  seems to  invite a  feminist  analysis.
32. 

See, e.g.,  Morris  E.  Cohn,  Author's Moral Rights: Film and Radio, 1 HOLLYWOOD  Q.

69,  69-70 (1945).

33.  The  relationship  between  art  and  commerce  is  so  rich  and  complex  that  I  could  not
begin  to  do  it justice  within  the  confines  of this  piece.  I  look at  one  aspect  of the relationship  in
Part  IV, where  I  show  that  contemporary  art  questions  the  distinction  between  art  and  ordinary
commercial  products.

34.  MERRYMAN  & ELSEN,  supra note 24,  at 423.
35.  Carter  v.  Helmsley-Spear,  Inc.,  71  F.3d  77,  81  (2d  Cir.  1995).
36.  MERRYMAN  & ELSEN,  supra note 24,  at 423.
37.  Carter, 71  F.3d  at  81.  Although  moral  rights  are  almost  always  described  as  non-
economic,  Professors  Hansmann  and  Santilli  have  argued  that  the  rights  protect  pecuniary
interests. Henry  Hansmann  & Marina Santilli,  Authors' and Artists'  Moral Rights: A  Comparative
Legal and Economic Analysis, 26  J.  LEGAL STUD.  95,  106  (1997);  see also William  Landes,  What
Has the Visual Artists Rights Act Accomplished? (John M.  Olin Law  & Economics  Working Paper
No. 
http://papers.ssm.com/sol3/
papers.cfim?abstractid=270985  (providing economic  analysis  of moral  rights).

available 

2001), 

at 

123 

(2d 

Series, 

CALIFORNIA LA WREVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

legal  decision  explained,  moral  rights  protect  "the  superior  interests  of human
genius.' 38  We  must  preserve  a  work as  the  artist intended  it so  that  his  genius
can be  "conveyed  to posterity  without damage." 39 Thus  moral  rights  protect  not
only the  personality  interests of the individual  artist;  they  also protect the  public
interest  by preserving  for posterity the object  that immortalizes  the traces  of the
artist's  greatness. 40  As  Professor  Merryman,  a  great  champion  of  American
moral  rights  law  has  argued:  "[T]here  is  more  at  stake  than the  concern  of the
. . There  is  also  the  interest  of others  in  seeing,  or  preserving  the
artist  . .
opportunity  to see,  the work  as the  artist intended  it, undistorted ....  We yearn
for the  authentic,  for contact  with the work in its  true version., 4 1

Members  of Congress  invoked  the  "special  societal  need"  and "important
42
public  interest"  served  by  the  arts  as  a  justification  for  enacting  VARA.
Members  repeatedly noted  the dual  purposes of the bill to protect "not  only...
the  artistic  community,  but  also  . . . the  American  public['s]  . . . access  to
artistic  creations. ' A3  Describing  art  as  necessary  for  the  "integrity  of  our
culture,"  one  representative  claimed  that "[a]rtists  in  this  country  play  a  very
important  role  in  capturing  the  essence  of culture  and  recording  it  for  future
generations. 44  A  prominent  witness 
importance  of
"preserving  [the  public's]  cultural  legacy,"  arguing  that  "[a]ny  distortion  of
cheats  the  public  of an  accurate  account  of the  culture  of our
[art]  works  ... 
In  this sense,  it would be  a  crime against  society  as  a  whole  to modify
time.' 
or  destroy  a  significant  work  of art.  Professors  Hansmann  and  Santilli,  in  an
important  economic  analysis of moral  rights,  describe  the  public  interest  in the
integrity  right  as follows:

testified  about 

the 

[W]orks  of  art  often  become  important  elements  in  a  community's
culture:  other  works  of art  are  created  in  response  to  them,  and  they
become  common  reference  points  ....  The  loss  or alteration  of such
works  would  therefore  be  costly to  the  community  at  large,  depriving
. of a  widely  used  part  of its  previously  shared
that  community  .
vocabulary.  46

.

38.  Merryman,  supra note  5, at  1029  (quoting  Millet, Tribunal  de  la Seine,  May  20,  1911,

Amm.  I. 271).
Id.

39. 
40.  This emphasis  on public  interest  is not universal  in moral rights  laws.  See supra note  22

and infra notes  50-54 and  accompanying  text.

41.  Merryman,  supra note  5, at  1041.
42.  H.R.  REP.  No.  101-514,  at  5-6  (1990),  reprinted in  1990  U.S.C.C.A.N.  6915,  6915-16
(footnote omitted).  The California  moral rights statute significantly  emphasizes the  public  interest.
See CAL.  CIV.  CODE  § 987(a)  (West  2006); cf  MASS.  GEN.  LAWS,  ch. 231,  §  85S  (2008)  (serving
dual  purpose of protecting  public and private  interests).

43. 
44. 
45. 

1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. at  6920.
Id. at 6916  (statement ofRep. Markey).
Id.  (statement  of  Weltzin  Blix,  a  representative  of  the  National  Artists  Equity

Association).

46.  Hansmann  & Santilli, supra note 37,  at  106.

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

Thus,  moral  rights  laws  serve  the  public  interest  by  preserving  our  shared
cultural  heritage,  the best in our society  and, by extension,  in  us.

47

II

THE ARTIST  AND THE  PUBLIC:

FREEING  ART FROM THE  CONTROL  OF  THE ARTIST

Does  the  artist  know  what's  best  for  his  art?  Is  he  the  right  person  to
entrust  with  the  enforcement  of  moral  rights?  Should  his  intent  govern  the
"meaning"  of the  piece?  And  for that matter,  who  is  the  artist  anyway?  In  this
Part  I focus  on a  notion  that predominates  in U.S.  moral  rights law:  by  granting
moral  rights  to the  individual  artist,  the law  assumes  he  will  act not only  in his
own  interest, but  in the  interest  of the  public  in general.  I  believe  moral  rights
I  begin  by  exploring
law  is  wrong 
circumstances  in  which  an  artist's  interests  have  conflicted  with  those  of the
public.  I  then  question  the  fundamental  assumptions  about  authorship  and
meaning  at the  foundation  of moral  rights  laws. Ultimately,  I argue  that the  best
thing  for the public's  interest  in art  might be to free  art  from the  shackles  of the
artist--or more precisely,  from our fantasies  of the  solo genius  artist.

to  assume  those  interests  converge. 

Of  course  to  suggest,  as  I  do,  that  the  artist  doesn't  necessarily  know
what's  best  for his  own art  seems  like  sacrilege.  The understandably  indignant
response  typically  will  be  something  like  this:  The  artist  should  have  the  last
word  on  his  art  because  it  is  his  unique  expression.  He  is  the  genius  without
whom  there  would  be  nothing  worth  protecting  in  the  first  place.  Wresting
control  of a  work away  from the artist  would be  like  wresting  control  of a  child
from his parent.

But  I  believe  this  response  relies  on  assumptions  about  art  that  are
overbroad,  historically contingent,  and at odds  with  the way people  create.  This
view  overlooks  that the  child/artwork has  grown up  and left  home-that  works
continue  to evolve  over time  based  on  how they  are  presented  and  received.  It
overlooks  that  the  child/artwork  left  home  because  the  father sold him/it.  It also
overlooks  numerous  instances  in  which  artists  are  not  the  best judges  of their
work, of whether  it is  good  or bad  or worth  preserving,  or of what  would make
it even  better.  (Parents  can't  always  see  their children  clearly  either.)  But on  a
deeper  level,  as I will  argue  below,  moral  rights  law  is premised on  a transitory,
albeit  deeply  powerful  notion  of artistic  authorship:  the  romantic  myth  of the
solo genius  artist. I  am not sure that this vision of authorship  was ever true. 4 8  In

47.  Compare  the  limited  protection  in  the  United  States  for  film  provided  by the  National
Film  Preservation  Act  of  1996,  2  U.S.C.  §  179  (2000),  and  the  more  robust  protection  for
architectural  landmarks. National  Historic  Preservation Act,  16 U.S.C.  § 470 (2000).

48.  For  some  of  the  important  scholarship  attacking  romantic  notions  of  authorship
embedded  in  intellectual property  law,  see  MARK  ROSE,  AUTHORS  AND  OWNERS:  THE  INVENTION
OF  COPYRIGHT  (1993);  Peter  Jaszi,  Toward a  Theory  of  Copyright:  The  Metamorphoses of

CALIFORNIA LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

any  event,  it  is  a  relatively  new  concept.  For just  one  example,  consider  that
prior  to  the  Romantics,  Samuel  Johnson  described  the  artist  as  a  "skilled
manual  worker."49  But  even 
true,
contemporary  artists have  been  relentlessly  attacking it for at  least the  last  forty
years.  Moral  rights  law  enshrines  notions  of  art  directly  at  odds  with
contemporary  artistic practice.

romantic  vision  were  once 

if  the 

A.  The Assumed Convergence of Public and Private Interests in Moral Rights

Laws

VARA  and  most  U.S.  state  moral  rights  laws  are  premised  on  the  view
that  moral  rights  serve  not  only  the  interests  of individual  artists,  but  also  a
shared public interest  in art.5° VARA's concern  for the public  interest is evident
in  its  legislative  history  as  well  as  its  heightened  protection  for  certain  works
that  have  achieved  "recognized  stature."  And  yet,  although  VARA  and  most
state  statutes  purport  to  protect  both  public  and  individual  interests,  these
statutes  vest  sole  power  to  enforce  the  moral  right  in  the  individual  artist.51
They do  so based on the  assumption that there is  an unproblematic  convergence
between  the  public interest  and the  interest  of the  artist  who  created  the  work.
His  decisions,  according  to  the  assumption,  will  inevitably  be  in  the  public
interest.52  Thus,  even  in  the  case  of a  work  of  "recognized  stature"  under
VARA,  only  the  artist  can  enforce  or  not  enforce  the  right  of integrity.  The
public  has  no  cause  of action. 53  Moreover,  the  artist  always  has  the  right  to
destroy  his  work,  even  if it  is  a  work "of recognized  stature"  and  thus  the  kind
of work that the  public presumably  has  an interest  in preserving. 54

"Authorship,"  1991  DUKE  L.J.  455  (1991);  Martha  Woodmansee,  The  Genius  and Copyright:
Economic and Legal Conditions of the Emergence of 'Author,'  17  EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY  STUD.
425  (1984);  James  D.A.  Boyle,  The  Search for an Author: Shakespeare and the Framers, 37 AM.
U.  L.  REV.  625  (1988).

For my  scholarship exploring  postmodern  notions of authorship in First Amendment  law, see
Amy  Adler,  What's Left? Hate Speech, Pornography and the Problem for Artistic Expression, 84
CALIF.  L. REV.  1499  (1996)  [hereinafter Adler,  What's Left?]; Amy  Adler, Note,  Post-Modern Art
and the Death of Obscenity Law, 99  YALE L.J.  1359  (1990)  [hereinafter Adler, Post-Modern Art].
49.  ALEXANDER  STURGIS  ET  AL.,  REBELS  AND  MARTYRS:  THE  IMAGE  OF  THE  ARTIST  IN

THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  (2006).

50.  New  York's  law does  not purport  to protect the public  interest. See N.Y.  ARTS  & CULT.
AFF.  LAW  §  14.03  (McKinney  2006).  Note  that  VARA  significantly  preempts  state  moral  rights
laws.  See, e.g.,  PATRY,  supra note  12.

51.  California's  statute  is an exception.  See infra note  53.
52.  See, e.g.,  Hansmann &  Santilli, supra note 37,  102-07  (seeing  harmony between  private
and  public  models  of moral  rights  laws).  Strahilevitz also defends  VARA's  grant  of control  to the
artist.  Strahilevitz, supra note 6,  at 853.

53.  California,  however,  allows  an  "organization  acting  in  the  public  interest"  to  bring  a
cause  of action  to protect  a  work  of "fine  art"  if  it merits  "substantial  public  interest."  CAL.  CIv.
CODE  § 989(a)(1),  (c)  (West 2006).

54.  This  is  true  even  in  California,  where  the  moral  rights  law  goes  much  further  than
VARA  to protect  the  public  interest.  See  supra note  53  (describing  public  interest  provisions  of
California  law).  But  even  in  California,  if  the  artist  wishes  to  destroy  his  own  masterpiece,

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

B.  The Conflict Between Artist and Public: The Myth of the Artist

Here  I  explore  a  series  of examples  in  order  to  unravel  the  assumed

harmony  between  the  artist's and the public's  interests in works  of art.

1. Artists Who Destroy Their Work

First, there  are  cases  in which  artists  wish  to destroy  work  that  the  public
arguably  has  an  interest  in preserving.  Moral  rights laws  permit  an  artist to  do
so.  But  history  is  rife  with  examples  of artists  who  destroyed  or attempted  to
destroy  what we  now see  as masterpieces.  Alberto  Giacometti,  George  Rouault,
and  Jasper  Johns,  among  others,  attacked  their  own  works. 55  In  the  literary
realm,  Kafka  famously  told his  friend  Max  Brod,  the  executor  of his  estate,  to
bum  his unpublished  manuscripts  upon his  death. Brod  defied  Kafka's wishes,
saving for the  public  The Trial and  The Castle among other works.56

This  tendency  of artists  to  destroy  their  work  is  not  uncommon;  it  goes
hand in hand with  the  romantic  myth of the tortured  artist.  For example,  Chaim
Soutine,  an  artist  who  took  that  myth  to  great  extremes  during  the  early
twentieth  century,  spent  much  of  his  anguished,  brilliant,  and  short  career
destroying  his  own  canvasses  in  fits  of  self-loathing.  Soutine  developed  a
hatred  for  paintings  he  had  created  during  an  early  period  of his  career.  He
spent  considerable  energy  toward  the  end  of  his  short  life  trying  to  recover
those  early  paintings  so  he  could  destroy  them.  Museums,  scholars,  and critics
now prize  what remains  of the work  from  that period.

Where  is  the  public  interest  in  this  example?  Of course,  one  could  argue
that  laws  giving  the  painter  what  he  wanted,  that  is,  the  ability  to  destroy  his
work,  would  encourage  the  production  of  more  art  by  creating  favorable
conditions  for  artists  in  general.  This  argument  assumes,  as  I  do,  that  most
artists would  wish to retain  control  over  their works.  But one  could  also  argue
that the  public  interest  is  served by saving the  paintings, contrary  to  the  artist's
wishes.  Whatever  the  answer  may  be,  these  conflicting  arguments  show  that
VARA  is  wrong  to assume  an  unproblematic  harmony between  the  interests  of
the  artist  and  the  public.  VARA  would  allow an  artist to destroy  his own  work
even  if it were  a  masterpiece.  Even  the  California  moral  rights  statute,  which
emphasizes  the  public  interest  more  than  VARA  does,  still  allows  an  artist  to

presumably  the  type  of work  that  the  phrase "substantial  public  interest"  is  intended  to protect,  he
would  have the  right to do  so  even if the public  tried  to stop  him. See CAL. CIv.  CODE  § 987(c)(1)
(West  2006)  ("No person,  except  an  artist who  owns  and  possesses  a  work  of fine  art  which  the
artist  has  created,  shall  intentionally  commit,  or  authorize  the  intentional  commission  of,  any
physical  defacement,  mutilation, alteration,  or  destruction of a work of fine art.").

55. 

See,  e.g.,  CECILE  NEBEL,  THE  DARK  SIDE  OF  CREATIVITY:  BLOCKS,  UNFINISHED
WORKS,  AND  THE  URGE  TO  DESTROY  95-132  (1988);  Louis  Menand,  Capture the Flag: Jasper
Johns's Own  Private Icon, SLATE,  Oct.  30,  1996,  http://www.slate.com/id/2905.  In  the  realm  of
music, Brahms,  who famously  destroyed  more  work than he published, provides  another  example.

56.  See  Strahilevitz,  supra note  6,  at 830-38  (discussing authors  who destroy  their  work).

CALIFORNIA  LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

destroy his work regardless  of the  public  interest  in  its preservation.5 7

2.  The Public Interest in Destroying Work the Artist Wants to Preserve

Sometimes,  the  clash of interests  between  artist  and  public  is  reversed:  as
I will  argue  in  Part  III,  the  public  interest may  sometimes  lie  in  the  destruction
of art,  even  when  the  artist  favors  preservation.  The  case  of Richard  Serra's
famous  Tilted Arc,  involving  the  removal  of his  site-specific  sculpture  from
Federal  Plaza  in  downtown  Manhattan,  provides  an  interesting  example. 58
Although  there  was  by no  means  a  public consensus  about the  work, 59 it is  fair
to  say that  many,  many  people  detested  Tilted Arc.60  Some  of them,  including
people  who  worked  in  the  building  where  the  sculpture  stood,  waged  a
campaign  against 
the
government  removed  Tilted Arc;  in  Serra's  view,  the  removal  constituted
destruction  because  the  piece  was  site-specific. 61  He  fought  the  government's
action,  bringing  a  variety  of  unsuccessful  claims,  but  was  unable  to  invoke
VARA  because  his  piece  was  destroyed  before  the  statute  was  enacted.  Had
Tilted Arc been  created  after VARA's  effective  date,  it might  still be  in  Federal
Plaza. 62 This case  illustrates  that  artists  will  sometimes  want  to preserve  works
that  many if not most members  of the public  wish to destroy or modify.63

to  this  public  vehemence, 

the  piece.  In  response 

57.  Compare the  "right  to repent"  in  some  civil-law countries,  which  in  theory  allows some
authors  to  withdraw  already-published  written  work.  See  Merryman,  supra note  5,  at  1028  (and
source cited therein).

58.  Serra v.  U.S.  Gen'l Servs.  Admin.,  847  F.2d  1045  (2d  Cir.  1988).
59.  Many  members of the  art world testified on behalf of Serra. Id.
60.  They detested  it  on  a variety  of grounds,  only  some  aesthetic.  Id. at  1047.  I believe  it

was  an extremely  aggressive  sculpture.

61.  Based  on the  design of the piece,  I find his claim  convincing.
62.  Could  Serra have  won  had  he  created  the work  after  VARA?  Serra would  have  had  to
convince  the  court  that the  government  had destroyed  the work  rather  than  merely relocated  it, as
the  government  argued.  If  Tilted Arc  had  been  relocated,  then  the  government's  actions  might
arguably  have  been  a modification  of placement,  excepted under  VARA  Section  106A(c)(2).  Cf
Bd.  of Managers  of Soho  Int'l  Arts Condominium  v.  City  of N.Y.,  No.  01  Civ.  1226,  2005  WL
1153752  (S.D.N.Y.  May  13,  2005)  (considering  if relocating  sculpture  constituted  destruction).
Serra  would  also  have  had  to  prove  the  work  was  of  "recognized  stature."  Because  Serra  is
arguably  the  greatest  living  American  sculptor,  Tilted  Arc  should  have  easily  qualified  for
"recognized  stature."  I am  less  confident that  a court  would  have accepted  the  artistic importance
of site specificity,  although  I think  the  piece was  clearly site  specific.  The rationale  articulated in a
2006  First  Circuit  decision  further  undermines  the  possibility  that  Serra  would  have  received
VARA protection.  Phillips  v.  Pembroke  Real  Estate,  Inc.,  459  F.3d  128  (1st Cir.  2006)  (holding
VARA inapplicable  to site-specific  art).

63. 

See  also  Carter  v.  Helmsley-Spear,  71  F.3d  77  (2d  Cir.  1995)  (holding  that  lobby
installation  was  a  work  for  hire  and  allowing removal).  The  Second  Circuit's  decision  in  Carter
that  the  sculpture  was  outside  VARA's  scope  was  not  inevitable.  I  suspect  unstated  policy
implications  affected  the  decision.  To  the  extent  there  was  an  identifiable  public  interest,  it
arguably  lay  on the  side of removal.

2009]

AGAINST  MORAL  RIGHTS

3. Making "Better" Art by  Violating the Artist's Intent

Sometimes  violating  the  artist's  intent  makes  the  work  better  from  an
artistic  perspective.  For example,  Clement  Greenberg,  the  great modernist  critic
and  champion  of  master  sculptor  David  Smith,  reportedly  changed  some  of
Smith's  sculptures after  the  artist's death  in direct  violation  of Smith's wishes.
Smith's  most  famous  sculptures  are  in  unpainted  steel,  but  he  sometimes
executed  painted  steel  forms  as  well.  Greenberg  found  the  unpainted  work
artistically  superior.  After  Smith  died,  Greenberg,  as  executor  of  his  estate,
stripped  several  of the  painted  sculptures  and  exposed  others  to  the  elements,
destroying  their  painted  surfaces.  He  did  so  in  direct  violation  of  Smith's
intent.64  The  art  world  was  horrified,  labeling  Greenberg's  act  vandalism.65
These  accusations  were well  founded;  there  is  clear  evidence  that  Smith would
have  been  outraged  by  Greenberg's  violations  and  would  have  disowned  the
sculptures.

66

And  yet,  consider  this:  Greenberg's  vandalism,  his  flagrant  violation  of
the  artist's  intent,  made  the  sculptures  "better." 67 The  art market  (although  not
necessarily  a  good  indicator  of  artistic  merit)68  agreed  with  Greenberg:
unpainted  Smiths  are  more  valuable  than painted  ones. 69  Critics, museums  and
collectors  prize  the  unpainted  over the painted  sculptures.7 °

4. From Romantic Genius to Multiple Authors

The  example  of Smith and Greenberg  shows  that  we  might sometimes  get
"better"  art if we  allow  subsequent  users  to  violate  the  artist's  intentions.7"  But
in
this  example  also  suggests  something  deeper  about  authorship,  and 

64.  Rosalind  Krauss,  Changing the  Work  of David Smith,  ART  IN AMERICA,  Sept.-Oct.

1974,  at  30, 31.

art "better."

65.  Merryman, supra note 5,  at  1040  (internal  citations  omitted).
66. 
67. 

Id.
See infra Part V  for discussion  of the  extraordinary  complexity  of defining  what  makes

68.  Perhaps it should  not even be  a relevant  one.  In battles over  government funding  for art,
the  pro-funding  side argues  that the  market cannot  begin  to  support  worthy  art.  And  the  market
fluctuates  and  can be  "wrong"  or  slow.  Van  Gogh  is but  one  famous  example  of an  artist  prized
today but  impoverished  in his  lifetime.  See  infra, notes  200,  209  accompanying  text,  discussing
the present art market's peculiarities.

69.  Richard  Serra, Art and Censorship, 17  CRITICAL  INQUIRY  574, 576  (1991).
70.  Even critic  Rosalind  Krauss,  arguing  for the  importance  of the painted  work in Smith's

oeuvre,  still recognized  the  stripped work's appeal. Krauss,  supra note 64, at  30.
Of course  it is  nearly  impossible, as  I have  argued  elsewhere,  to pinpoint  the  proper  method
to evaluate  artistic merit.  See generally, Adler, Post-Modern Art, supra note 48 (analyzing  lack  of
critical  consensus  for  evaluating  art  and  shifting  evaluations  of  art  over  time;  showing
the  critical  consensus  favored  Greenberg's
implications  for  obscenity  law).  In  this  case, 
preferences,  but  this  observation  may  be  circular  since  Greenberg's  sensibility  held  such  sway
over  critics.  Merryman,  supra note  5, at  1038  (arguing  that  higher  prices  may  have  reflected
Greenberg's  power).

71.  Compare  our  attitude  toward Greek  sculpture,  which we often  forget  was  once  painted.

Krauss, supra note 64.

CALIFORNIA LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

particular,  about  the  assumptions  regarding  authorship  that  undergird  moral
rights  law.  Most  of us  share  a  fantasy  of artistic  creation, particularly  in those
moments  of awe  we  feel  when  looking  at  works  that  move  us.  We  imagine  a
solo genius  author  who had a  vision and  expressed  it in the  work. The  work he
touched now bears  some  trace of his  genius.  It is  as if we  can be  in his presence
by being in the presence  of the work.  It follows  that  we  must preserve the  work
as  he  intended  it  to  access  his  singular  vision.  This  fantasy  of artistic  creation
has  persisted  even  though  it  has  been  under  assault  for  a  very  long  time,  not
only  by scholars,  but by artists themselves

Although  assaults  against  the  author  as  romantic  genius  tend  to  be
associated  with  postmodernism,  one  does  not  need  to  resort  to  postmodern
jargon  about  the  "death  of the  author"  to  see  that  the  romantic  concept  of a
singular,  all-knowing  artist was  always  a distortion.  If we  look  into the  heart  of
modernism  itself,  to  the  greatest  icon  of  modernist  poetry,  T.S.  Eliot's  The
Waste  Land, we  find  an  example  of how  complex  authorship  can  be.  In  the
dedication  to  the  poem,  Eliot  writes  "to  Ezra  Pound,  il  miglior  fabbro"  ("the
better craftsman").72  Why  did  Eliot, author  of one  of the  greatest  poems of the
century,  call  Pound  "the  better  craftsman"?  Apparently,  Pound  edited  Eliot's
manuscript  so  heavily  that  Eliot  credited  Pound  with  turning  The  Waste Land
"from  a jumble  of good and  bad passages  into a  poem." 73  Pound  rescued  from
Eliot's  hand parts  of the  poem  that  now  seem  essential,  as  if Pound-not  the
author-understood  better what  the poem  ultimately  "meant." 74  Why was Eliot
"the  author"  and  Pound  merely  "the  editor"?  When  does  writing  stop  and
editing  begin?  Were  they  co-authors?  And  did  The  Waste Land have  authors
other than  Eliot or Pound?

Eliot  willingly  collaborated  with  his  editor.  In  contrast,  the  moral  rights
problems  I  examine 
in  this  Essay  involve  what  I  might  charitably  call
"unwilling  collaboration."  But  the  Eliot  example  still  shows  something
important  about authorship:  even  though  we  might imagine  The  Waste Land as
a  product  of a  singular  artistic  vision,  its  creation  was  far  more  complicated.
From  this  perspective,  we  can  begin  to  see  many  creative  endeavors  as  the
product  of collaboration.  The  relationship  between  Pound  and  Eliot  is  merely
one  example  of  how  multiple  authors  might  lie  beneath  the  surface  of  the
singular author.

This  hidden multiplicity  of authorship  has led  to significant  controversy  in
the  realm  of photography,  where  the  printer  of a  photograph  (often  someone
other  than  the  photographer)  exercises  dramatic  control  over  the  resulting
work.75  Similar  controversies  about  authorship  arise  in  other  realms  where

72. 
73. 

T.S.  ELIOT,  THE WASTE  LAND  AND  OTHER  POEMS  28  (1930).
RICHARD  BADENHAUSEN,  T.S.  ELIOT  AND  THE  ART  OF  COLLABORATION  76  (2004)

(quoting T.S.  Eliot, On a Recent Piece of Criticism, 10  PURPOSE  93 (1938)).

74. 
75. 

Id. at 75-79.
See  Michael  Rips,  Who  Owns  Seydou  Keita?, N.Y.  TIMES,  Jan.  22,  2006;  see  also

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

artists  delegate  the  fabrication  of  their  work  to  others.  Consider  the  recent
litigation  between  MASS  MoCA  (the  Massachusetts  Museum  of
VARA 
Contemporary  Art)  and  Swiss  artist Christoph  Biichel  over  the  museum's  right
to  display  the  artist's  enormous,  unfinished  installation. 76  The  judge  at  oral
argument  questioned  the  artist's claim  of sole  authorship  of the  work given  the
process  of  its  creation.  Dwelling  on  the  months  spent  by  museum  workers
assembling  the  piece  and  acquiring  objects  for  display,  compared  to  the  mere
six  weeks  spent  on  site  by  the  artist,  the  judge  asked,  "Who  owns  the  work
when what  is  being created  is collaborative  art?  The museum  spent  most of the
money and did most of the work.",77

As the  next section  will show, it is not only what happens in the process  of
creation,  but  also  the  continuing  life  of the  work  that  further  complicates  the
notion  of authorship.

5.  Multiple Authors and Multiple Meanings: The Curator as Artist

At its  most basic  level, moral  rights  law  assumes  that the  artist rather than
subsequent  users  should control  the  meaning  of his  work. Moral rights  scholars
repeatedly  invoke  the  need  to protect  authorial  intention.  Professor  Merryman
explained that the purpose  of the  right  of integrity  was to preserve "the  work  as
the  artist  intended  it."'78  Professor  Kwall,  one  of  the  most  important  and
passionate  moral  rights  scholars,  wrote  that  "the  essence  of  moral  rights
protection  is  the  idea  of respect  for  the  author's  original  meaning." 79  As  she
explained:  "Assaults  upon  a work's  integrity  damage  authorial  dignity  because
the  author's  external  embodiment  of  his  message  no  longer  represents  his
intended  meaning."80  Thus  the  right  of integrity  is  fundamentally  a  right  that
protects  authorial  intention.

The  belief-that we  can  discern,  let  alone  police,  artistic  intention,  that it
is necessarily  relevant to the  meaning  of a work-is premised  on naive  theories

Michael  Kimmelman,  Walker Evans. Or Is It?, N.Y.  TIMES,  Aug. 25,  2006.  Cf  SHL  Imaging, Inc.
v.  Artisan  House,  Inc.,  117  F.  Supp.  2d  301,  310  (S.D.N.Y.  2000)  (copyright  dispute  between
printer and photographer).

76.  Mass.  Museum  of  Contemporary  Art  Found.,  Inc.  v.  Buchel,  No.  07-30089-MAP,

2008 WL 2755842,  at *13  (D.  Mass. July  11,  2008).

77. 

Posting  of  Paul  Schmelzer 

2007/09/22/mass-moca-wins-show-buchel-work/ 
Michael  Ponsor).

to  Off  Center,  http:/iblogs.walkerart.org/offcenter/
(Sep.  22,  2007,  11:26  CDT)  (quoting  Judge

78.  Merryman,  supra note 5,  at  1041.
79.  Kwall,  Inspiration, supra  note  5,  at  1986  (emphasis  added);  see  also  id.  at  1972
("Central  to moral rights  is the  idea of respect  for the  author's meaning and message as embodied
")  (emphasis  added).  The  French  court  in  Millet  stated that  work
in  a  tangible  commodity  ....
must be  preserved exactly  as  "it  emerged from  the  imagination  of its author and  later  conveyed to
posterity  without  damage."  Merryman,  supra note  5  (quoting  Millet,  Tribunal  de  la  Seine,  May
20,  1911,  Amm.  I.  271).  Merryman  describes  violating  integrity  as "misrepresent[ing]  the  artist's
intention."  Id.

80.  Kwall, Inspiration, supra note 5,  at  1975.

CALIFORNIA LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

of interpretation. 81  But  more  importantly  for  our  purposes,  this  belief is  also
particularly  inapt  when  thinking  about  contemporary  art.  As  I  have  argued
previously  elsewhere,  one  of the  virtues  of artistic  expression  is  its  capacity  to
convey  multiple  meanings. 82  Even  when  left  intact,  a  work  of art  is constantly
reworked  and re-authored,  depending  on who views it and in  what context. 83

This  multiplicitous  quality  of a  work-its  openness  to  being  re-infused
with meaning-permits  us to  imagine that there  are  multiple  artists,  even  when
only  one artist created  the  original piece.  Think of curating  with this  in mind. I
propose that the  curator (along  with the  "original"  artist) is always  an author  of
the  art she  displays.  From the  initial  act of choosing  to place an object  in an  art
setting,  to  deciding  on  its  lighting  or placement,  all  curatorial  choices  change
the  meaning  of a  work. The  growing  reliance  on  wall  text  only  highlights  the
curator's  ability  to  affect  art's  meaning. 84  And all  of these  are  changes  that  we
should celebrate  rather than mourn.  In short, the  curator is an artist.

Consider  the conflict  that arose  in the  1990s  around  a traveling  exhibition
about  artists'  responses  to the  pioneering photographer  of movement  Eadweard
Muybridge.  Included  in  the  original  exhibition  was  an  early  work  by  artist  Sol
Lewitt  that  used  optics  to  show  a  woman's  nude  body  advancing  toward  the
viewer.  When  the  show  came  to  the  Museum  of  American  Art,  Elizabeth
Broun,  a  curator  there,  objected  to  the  Lewitt  piece,  claiming 
it  raised
associations  of peepholes  and was  degrading  to women.  She proposed  to move
it to  a  separate room  with  wall  text  explaining  the  issue  and  a blank  book  for
visitors  to  record  their  thoughts.  Critics  demonized  Broun  for  her  act  of
"censorship." 85 Although I strongly disagree  with Broun's cramped  interpretive
stance-that  the  piece  was  necessarily degrading  to women-I  want to  defend
her actions  on another level. Putting  aside that she was  altering  a prior curator's
choices,  her  work  was  no  more  censorship  than  other  decisions  that curators
make  every  day.  The  very  choice  of putting  a  Lewitt  in  a  Muybridge  show
changed  the  meaning  of the  Lewitt.  Putting  it  in  a  room  and  making  it  about
objectification  of female  bodies  would have  changed  its meaning  as  well.  Even
though Lewitt  may  have  intended  the  work to  be  about  Muybridge,  surely  that
was not  all  he  intended, nor should  his  intent hold the  work  hostage  from other
meanings or interpretations.

This  example  illustrates  a  problem  with  the  assumption  in  moral  rights

81.  This Section  depends heavily  on my  previous work.  Adler,  What's Left?, supra note  48.
82. 
I treat these  arguments  in depth  in Adler,  What's Left?, supra note  48,  and  also in Amy
Adler,  The Thirty-Ninth Annual Donley Memorial Lectures: The Art of Censorship, 103  W. VA.  L.
REV.  205  (2000).

83.  Adler,  What's Left?, supra note 48, at  1541-46.
84.  Blake Gopnik,  Read All About It:  With  Explanatory Labels Papering Museum  Walls,
Are  We  Still Looking at the Pictures They Explain?, WASH.  POST,  Dec.  9, 2001  at G01 (describing
the  expanding role of wall  text in the  museum visitor's experience).

85.  Barbara  Gamarekian,  Show  Closing Demanded at  Washington Museum,  N.Y.  TIMES,

July  13,  1991.

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

scholarship  that  a major purpose  of the  right  of integrity  is  to protect an  artist's
intent  about the  meaning  of his work."  It is  important  to note,  however, that  in
spite  of this  theoretical  foundation,  VARA  does  not  go  so  far  as  to  allow  an
artist  to  sue  a curator.87 The statute  provides  that  the  "modification  of a work  of
the  public  presentation,  including  lighting
visual  art which  is  the  result  of ... 
and  placement,  of  the  work"  is  not  a  violation  of  the  right  of  integrity. 88
Notwithstanding  this  limitation,  however,  the  theoretical  foundations  of moral
rights,  advanced  in  the  scholarship,  rest  on  assumptions  about  meaning  and
authorship  that  are  incompatible  with the  way we  view  and interpret art. As  this
example  shows,  art  is  constantly  changing  and  we  are  constantly  changing  it.
Rather  than  see  such  change  as  a  violation  of the  spirit  if not  the  letter  of the
law, we  should  see  it as commitment  to the vitality  of art.

Some  European  moral  rights  laws  might  allow artists to  sue  their curators
in circumstances  similar to the  example  described  above.  Recently,  the  highest
court in Germany  protected a  painter's control  over the  display of his paintings.
The court held that  "adding  customized frames  to paintings  that extended"  their
patterns  violated  the  painter's  right  of integrity. 89  In  a  famous  Italian  case,  de
later  work  and  under-
Chirico  sued  a  curator  for  over-representing  his 
representing  his  earlier  work  in  a  1950  exhibition  at  the  Venice  biennale.  The
lower  court  found  for  de  Chirico,  but  the  appellate  court  reversed  the  decision
on other  grounds.90  In  spite of the victory,  the very  possibility  of such  a lawsuit
disrupts  the necessary  collaboration,  willing or not,  between  artist  and curator.

AGAINST  INTEGRITY:  THE VALUE  OF  DESTROYING  AND ALTERING  WORKS OF

III

"Use  a Rembrandt  as  an ironing board"

ART

-art  work by Marcel  Duchamp 91

Here  I  make  a  claim  that  many  might  find  repugnant:  that  there  is  an
artistic  value  in modifying,  defacing  and  even  destroying  unique  works  of art.
In  fact, these  actions  may reflect  the essence  of contemporary-art  making.  As a
result,  moral  rights  law  endangers  art  in  the  name  of protecting  it.  But  is  this

See supra note 79.

86. 
87.  Professor  Merryman  expressed  clear  disapproval  of this  possibility.  Merryman,  supra
note  5,  at  1048.  He strictly  limits  his concern  for artistic intentions  to physical  violations  of works.
17  U.S.C.  §  106A(c)(2)  (2000).  Such  modification  is  actionable  if  caused  by  gross

88. 

negligence.  Id.

89.  See  Rigamonti,  supra  note 

Bundesgerichtshof 
Bundesgerichtshofes  in Zivilsachen  [BGHZ]  32 (F.R.G.)).

[Federal  Court 

[BGH] 

8,  at  366 
of 

(describing 
Justice], 

the  Hundertwasser  case,
des

150  Entscheidungen 

90.  MERRYMAN  & ELSEN,  supra note 24,  at  316.
91.  Marcel  Duchamp,  Apropos  of "Ready-mades,"  Talk  at  the  N.Y.  Museum  of  Modem

Art (Oct.  19,  1961),  in ART  AND  ARTISTS  (July  1966), at 47.

CALIFORNIA LA  W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

danger  at  least justified  by  a  countervailing  benefit?  In  the  last  section  of this
Part,  I argue  that moral rights  law does  less good  than we might assume. This  is
because  the  urgency  of preserving  contemporary  works  of art-the  only  kinds
of  works  that  VARA  protects-has  diminished  in  the  wake  of  changes  in
contemporary  culture.

A.  The Artistic Value of Attacking Art

is 
to  symbolize  change.92  In  revolutionary  France, 

Of  course,  there  may  be  a  non  artistic  value  in  destroying  or  defacing
works  of art. The  history of regime change  attests to this.  Often the  first  act of a
new  regime 
to  destroy  the  prior  one's  art  works,  particularly  public
monuments, 
the  painter
Jacques-Louis  David  wrote:  "Thus  we  shall  pile  up  in  Paris  the effigies  of the
kings  and  their  vile  attributes  to  serve  as  the  pedestal  for  the  emblem  of the
French  people." 93  Although  there  are  compelling  arguments 
in  favor  of
preserving  the remnants  of an  old regime,  there  is  also  a  strong symbolic  value
to  altering  or  destroying  them,  particularly  when  the  fallen  regime  was  a
repressive  one.

An  analogous  problem  in  this  country  is  the  question  of  whether  to
preserve racist  public monuments  from our history. 94 For example,  in his book,
Written in Stone, Sandy  Levinson describes  the  dilemma faced by New Orleans
in  deciding  what  to do  with  a  nineteenth-century  monument  to  racism.  On  the
one  hand, there  is  a public interest  in  destroying the  monument  to symbolically
repudiate the  racist past. Destroying it would  also avoid the  risk of spreading its
hateful  message  or  seeming  to endorse  it. Yet  on the  other hand,  if we destroy
the  monument,  we  lose  a chance  to  study  it as  history or to be  reminded  of the
continued  need to fight racism.  I submit  that the best solution  is one  that draws
on  the  principles  of  "creative  destruction": 
to  "create"  a  new  work  by
vandalizing  the  monument.95 Indeed,  this  is  precisely  what  happened  in  2004
when  anti-racist  vandals  attacked  the  statue,  defacing  it  with  angry  graffiti.
Such  mutilation  preserves  the  memory  of the  past,  but  with a violent  statement
of repudiation,  allowing both messages  to co-exist. 96

92.  Consider  the  history  of  the  Soviet  Union,  the  vast  destruction  of  monuments  in
revolutionary  France,  or  the  symbolically  fraught  choices  made  during  the  invasion  of  Iraq
regarding  the  Saddam statue.

93. 

JAKE  &  DINOS  CHAPMAN,  Introduction to  INSULT  TO  INJURY  (2004)  (quoting  David

Proposes  a Monument  to the  French People  (1793)).

94.  Compare  the  treatment  of other  remnants  of  racism,  such  as  racist  memorabilia.  See
Adler,  What's Left?,  supra note  48,  at  1559,  n.252  (comparing  artists  David  Levinthal  and  Fred
Wilson, both of whom  work with racist  memorabilia).

95.  Cf  JOSEPH  A.  SCHUMPETER,  CAPITALISM  SOCIALISM  AND  DEMOCRACY  (3d  ed.  1962)

(employing the concept  of creative  destruction).

96.  A  significant  trend  in  European  monument  design  is  to  re-use  or  mutilate  vestiges  of
the  tainted  past.  James  E.  Young,  The  Counter-Monument: Memory Against Itself in  Germany
Today, 18  CRITICAL  INQUIRY  267  (1992);  Allan Cochrane,  Making up Meanings in a Capital City:
Power, Memory and Monuments in Berlin, 13  EUR.  URB.  & REG'L  STUD.  5 (2006).

2009]

AGAINSTMORAL  RIGHTS

Moral  rights  law  assumes  that  the  "public  interest"  in  a  work  of art  is
always  uniform  and  readily  discernible,  and that  it always  favors  preservation.
But as  this example  shows,  the  public may  vehemently  disagree  about whether
to preserve  a  work;  the  public  interest  may also  change  over  time.  Amidst  the
uncertainty,  one  can argue  that  it is  sometimes  in  the public  interest  to  mutilate
a work rather than to preserve  it.9 7

More  to  the  point,  there  are  vital  artistic interests,  not  merely  social  or
political  ones,  in  altering,  vandalizing  or  even  destroying  unique  works.  Of
course,  it  is  much easier to  grasp the  value  of alteration  or destruction  when  we
think  of  changing  reproductions of  art  rather  than  original,  unique  objects
themselves.  (One  state's  moral  rights  law  protects  reproductions  of artworks,
not  merely  originals.) 98  The  copyright  concept  of fair  use  attempts  to  capture
this  interest  in  altering  reproductions.99  Thus  it  is  easy  for  law  professors  to
describe  dutifully the value  of Duchamp  drawing on a  copy of the  Mona  Lisa in
his  famous  L.H.O.O.Q.  But it  is  one  thing to  draw  on a  copy of the  Mona Lisa
and  quite  another  to  draw  on  the  Mona  Lisa  itself. That would  be-perhaps-
unbearable.  The Mona  Lisa is  a  masterpiece,  a  unique  work,  part of our  shared
cultural  history,  with  an  aura  that  persists  even  in  this  age  of  mechanical
reproduction-isn't  it?' 00

Yet  I  want to  argue  that  there  is  a  value  in  modifying  or even  destroying
the  original artwork  itself, not just the  copy.  Consider  an example  that  straddles
the border between  modifying  a reproduction  and an original:  the alteration  of a
revered,  extremely rare,  limited edition print  series by  Goya.

In 2001,  artists Jake  and Dinos  Chapman  bought  one of the  few remaining
sets  of Francisco  de  Goya's canonical  Disasters of War series.  A  meditation  on
the  horrors  of war,  Goya's  prints  are  agonizing  in  their  portrayal  of brutality.

97.  The  complete  destruction  of a  monument  could  also  result  in  a  new  work;  the  absence
of  the  sculpture  becomes  meaningful.  As  Vincent  Scully  mournfully  observed  about 
the
destruction  of  the  twin  towers,  "the  vacancy  becomes  a  presence  we  must  recognize."  Alec
Applebaum,  A  Professor Learns to Love  the Twin  Towers-and Hate the  Void They  Left Behind
(Q  &  A: 
available  at
http://www.metropolismag.comhtm/content_120  1/scu/index.html.

Scully),  METROPOLIS 

Vincent 

MAG,  Dec. 

2001, 

98. 

See  N.Y.  ARTS  & CULT.  AFF.  LAW  §  14.03  (McKinney  2006).  VARA  doesn't protect

reproductions,  but does  protect limited editions.  17  U.S.C.  § 106  (A) (1)  (2000).

99.  Although  the  fair  use  provisions  of the  Copyright  Act  technically  apply  to VARA,  no
fair  use  defense  to  a  moral  rights  case  has  been  adjudicated.  I  doubt  a  court  would  extend  the
provisions  very  far  in  the  case  of a  permanent  alteration  of  a  unique  work  of  art.  The  fair  use
concept  seems  to  depend  on  copying.  The  original  remains 
intact.  Permanently  defacing
someone's  work to  create  a  new  one  seems  far more  troubling  than  market  damages  caused  by
unauthorized  copies.  The  hearings  on  VARA  hint  that  Congress  didn't  envision  the  fair  use
exception  being  easily invoked  in this context:  "The  Committee  does  not want  to preclude fair  use
claims  in  this  context.  However,  it  recognizes  that  it  is  unlikely  that  such  claims  will  be
appropriate .... " H.R. REP.  No.  101-514, reprinted in  1990  U.S.C.C.A.N.  6915,  6932  (emphasis
added).  The  House  Report  stated  that  the  "modification  of a  single  copy  or  limited  edition  of a
work  of visual  art has  different  implications  for the  fair  use  doctrine  than does  an act  involving  a
work  reproduced  in  potentially unlimited  copies."  Id.

100.  But see infra Part III.C.

CA LIFORNIA  LA W RE VIE W

[Vol.  97:263

Robert  Hughes  deemed the  series  "the  greatest  antiwar manifesto  in the  history
of  art."''1 1 It  has  been  idolized  by  artists,  inspiring,  for  example,  Picasso's
Guernica.10 2 Indeed,  the series  has been called "the  most revered set  of prints in
existence."' 0 3 It is  also extremely  rare:  the Goya  Foundation produced  forty  sets
in total  as  a  limited  edition  in  1937  from  the  artist's original  plates.'04  The set
that  Jake and  Dinos Chapman  acquired  was  all the  more  extraordinary  because
it was  complete  and  in  mint condition. A critic  said  of the  set  they bought:  "In
terms  of print connoisseurship,  in  terms  of art  history,  in  any  terms,  this  is  a
treasure  .. 

. ,, 05

The  Chapman  brothers  took  this  "treasure"-this  rare  and  precious
expression  of art's  moral power-and  systematically  defaced  it.  Instead of the
faces  of Goya's  agonized  victims  of war, the  artists  superimposed  drawings  of
puppies  and  clowns.  Claiming  that they  had "rectified"  the  images,  they  called
the  new  work "Insult  to Injury."  Critic Jonathan  Jones  wrote  of the  Chapman's
act of vandalism:  "To  destroy a work of art is  a  genuinely nasty, insane,  deviant
thing  to  do.  What  the  Chapmans  have  released  is  something  nasty,  psychotic
and value-free."' 0 6

But,  curiously,  as  Jones  thought  about  the  piece,  he  began  to  see
redemption  in the  Chapmans'  act of shocking  deviance.  Viewing  their  work as
an  extension  rather than  desecration  of Goya's  despair,  he  wrote:  "What  they
share  with  [Goya]  is  the  most primitive  and  archaic  and  Catholic  pessimism  of
his  art-the  sense  not  just  of  irrationality  but  something  more  tangible  and
diabolic.  The  Chapmans  have  remade  Goya's masterpiece  for  a  century which
has  rediscovered  evil.  And  I  have  fallen  into  their  trap."10 7  The  Chapmans'
"insanity"  and "deviance"  become  essential  to the  work, a way  of recreating the
the  horror  becomes  more
horror 
complicated:  the  Chapmans  also  assaulted  the possibilities  of art.  Goya,  as  the
Chapmans  remind  us,  was  a  symbol  of the  "individuated  Romantic  artist.' l0 8
Goya  held  out  hope  that  art  could  address  our  deepest  humanity. 109  By
attacking  the  ultimate  expression  of art's  moral  voice, Insult to Injury becomes
a  meditation  on  the  loss  of  that  conception  of art. 10  The  Chapmans'  work
proclaims  that the  romantic  idea  of art  as  an  exalted  realm,  expressive  of our
humanity and  imbued  with  the creative  spirit  of the  author, is over.  Their work

that  Goya  conveyed.  But 

this 

time, 

ROBERT  HUGHES,  GOYA  304 (2003).

101. 
102.  Alan  Riding,  Goya Probably Would not be Amused, N.Y. TIMES,  Apr.  6,  2003.
103. 
104.  Goya  produced  the  plates  between  1810-1829,  but  they  were  too  daring  to  print

Jonathan Jones,  Look  What  We Did, GUARDIAN,  March  31,  2003

during his  lifetime. KERSTIN  MEY,  ART  AND OBSCENITY  58  (2007).

Jones, supra note  103.
Id.
Id.
CHAPMAN,  Introduction to INSULT  TO  INJURY,  supra note  93.

105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109.  Hughes, supra note  101.
110.  To  fully understand  this loss,  see Part  IV.

2009]

AGAINST MORAL RIGHTS

attacks the  very  idea  of art that moral rights seek to protect.

With  this  in  mind,  consider  now  a  "creative"  attack  on  a  unique  work:
Robert Rauschenberg's  "Erased  de  Kooning  Drawing."  In  1953,  Rauschenberg
took  a  drawing  by  Willem  de  Kooning  and  spent  a  month  erasing  it. 111  The
resulting  work  is  a  "sheet  of paper  bearing  the  faint,  ghostly  shadow  of  its
former  markings."' 112  Entitling  the  work  "Erased  de  Kooning  Drawing/Robert
Rauschenberg/1953,"  Rauschenberg  exhibited  the  erasure  as  his  own  art.
Rauschenberg  wrote:  "I wanted  to  create  a work  of art  by  [erasing]  .... Using
my  own  work  wasn't  satisfactory  ... I  realized  that  it  had to  be  something  by
someone who  everybody  agreed  was great,  and the  most logical  person  for that
was de  Kooning.'" 3

Here  is  an  example  of how art  can emerge  from the  near  destruction  of a
previous  piece.  The  Rauschenberg  work  depends  on  the  fact  that  he  violated
not  a  reproduction  of a  work  but  an  original,  and  not just  any  original,  but  an
original  by  Willem  de  Kooning. 114  To  fully  grasp  the  radical  quality  of
Rauschenberg's  work,  one  must  remember  the  place  of de  Kooning  in  1950s
America.  At that  time,  abstract  expressionism  so dominated  American  art  (and
our artistic  place  in the  world)  that de  Kooning and his  compatriots  had come to
be  viewed  as  heroic  and  almost godlike.  In  that  climate,  erasing  a  drawing  by
de  Kooning  was  a  shocking,  sacrilegious  act.  It  captured,  perhaps  better  than
anything  else  Rauschenberg  did,  his  scandalous  assault  on  a  particular
conception  of "art."  For  the  generation  of artists after de  Kooning  the  question
was:  how  would  it  be  possible  to  make  art  in  the  wake  of the  godlike  artists
who  came  before  them?1 15  Rauschenberg's  answer  was  that  new  art  might  be
about  its  own  failure  to  achieve  greatness,  its  impotent  rebellion  against  the
heroic  past.  Rauschenberg  began  to  make  art  that,  in  the  words  of Douglas
Crimp,  was about  "its  own  destruction."' 116

111. 

It  is important  that De  Kooning gave  the drawing  to  Rauschenberg.  Thus,  even  if  the
drawing  had  been  protected  by  VARA,  this  was  a  willing  collaboration,  not  a  moral  rights
violation.  As with  the  example  of Goya,  above,  I  offer  this  example  to establish  that  destruction
and modification  are central  modes of creation.

112.  CALVIN  TOMKINS,  OFF THE  WALL 97  (1980).
113.  CALVIN  ToMKINs,  THE  BRIDE  AND  THE  BACHELORS:  FIVE  MASTERS  OF  THE  AVANT

GARDE  210 (Penguin  Books,  1976) (1965).

114. 

It  may  be  hard  for  us  to  appreciate  now  how  radical  Rauschenberg  was.  We  might
have  some  insight  into  the  issue  from  the  current  valuation  of  de  Kooning  in  the  art  market:  a
small  de Kooning  drawing  was recently  on  view at  Christie's for three million  dollars.

115.  My  reading  here,  pun  half-intended,  is  influenced  by HAROLD  BLOOM,  THE ANXIETY

OF  INFLUENCE  (2d  ed.  1997).

116.  DOUGLAS  CRIMP,  ON  THE  MUSEUM'S  RUINS  56 

(1993) 

(explaining 

Rauschenberg's  work, "photography  began to conspire with  painting in its own destruction").

that 

in

CALIFORNIA  LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

B. Reconceiving Art as the Destruction ofArt

"I  was trying to make art  and therefore  I had to erase  art."

-Rauschenberg

17

As  I  contend  above,  destroying  art  can  be  a  valuable  way  of making  art.
But I  want to claim  something  more.  Destruction  is  not  simply  an  occasionally
valuable  thing, but  rather,  a  central  quality  of "art"  itself. This  is because  of a
surprising  development  within  art  history:  "art"  as  a  category  has  come  to  be
about  its  own  metaphorical  destruction.  If we  accept  this  precept,  then  the
physical  destruction  of  works  of  art  becomes  a  powerful  expression  of the
metaphorical  essence of art.  In  the  following  sections,  I  begin  by arguing  that
metaphorical  destruction  lies  at  the  heart  of contemporary  art.  I  then  offer  a
glimpse  of the broader place  of destruction  in art history. 1

1. From Dada and Pop to Postmodernism: Contemporary Art as the

Destruction of "Art"

"[T]he  most  ambitious  art  will  henceforth  'make  history'  by  . . .
committing  acts of destruction  against what is  most valued."

-Alan  Liu,  The Laws of Cool 119
In  2006,  a  French  performance  artist  used  a  hammer  to  attack  the
venerated  1917  sculpture  Fountain by  Marcel  Duchamp.120  Duchamp's  most
notorious  work,  Fountain was  a  "readymade"  manufactured  urinal  which  he
elevated  to the  status  of art by placing it in a gallery  setting. 121 The French  artist
who  attacked  Fountain, Pierre  Pinoncelli,  claimed  upon  his  arrest  that  his
vandalism  was  itself  a  work  of art.  He  also  claimed  that  the  new  art work  he
made  in his  attack was in the spirit  of Duchamp 1 22

I  think he  was right  on both  counts.  Crazy,  but  right.  Like  Rauschenberg
or the  Chapman  brothers,  Pinoncelli  made  a  new  work  of art  by  attacking  an

117. 
51  (1987).

ROBERT  RAUSCHENBERG,  BARBARA  ROSE  &  ELIZABETH  AVEDON,  RAUSCHENBERG

118.  Two  exceptionally  important  caveats  are  necessary.  First,  for the  sake of argument,  I
have  dramatically  oversimplified  my  narrative  about  contemporary  art  and  art  history.  This  is
essential  to emphasize  because  of the  extreme  pluralism  that  characterizes  recent  art.  Second,  my
argument  is  also  contentious.  I  have  taken  a  strong  position  on  the  state  of  affairs  in  art,  and
although some  scholars,  critics,  curators and  artists  would  likely  agree  with  me,  I  have  no  doubt
that others would  vigorously contest my account.

119.  ALAN  Liu, THE  LAWS OF  COOL  8  (2004).
120.  Note that  no  "original"  of the  1917  work exists.  Eight  are  in  existence.  See  Part III.C.
discussing  preservation  and  authenticity.  Duchamp  turned  the  urinal  on  its  side  and  submitted  it
under  the pseudonym  "R.  Mutt"  to  a  1917  exhibition.  It was refused.

121.  Duchamp's  pseudonymous  signature  was  also  significant 

it
simultaneously  transformed  the  urinal  into  "art" while  undermining  the  concept  of "art."  This  was
not  the  first  attack  against  Fountain. In  2001,  two  artists  urinated  on  the  Fountain in  the  Tate
Modern.  Alan  Riding,  Conceptual Artist  as  Vandal:  Walk  Tall and Carry a Little Hammer (or
Ax),  N.Y. TIMES,  Jan.  7,  2006.

regard; 

in 

this 

122. 

Id.

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

old  one.  But  while  both  Rauschenberg  and  the  Chapmans  chose  art  that  was
romantic  and heroic,  Pinoncelli's  choice  of target  gave  his  creation  a  different
meaning. By  attacking  a Duchamp,  he  was indeed  working  in that  artist's spirit.
This  spirit  exposes  something  deeper  about  the  centrality  of  destruction  to
contemporary  art-making.

Consider  the  work  that  was  the  target  of Pinoncelli's  attack.  Duchamp's
initial  intervention  into  artistic  discourse-inserting  a  lowly,  commercially
manufactured  urinal  into  gallery  space  and  calling  it  art-was  itself an  act  of
metaphorical  destruction.  French  sociologist  Pierre  Bourdieu  spoke  of  the
Duchampian  readymade  as  "a  ritual  desecration"  of art.  Duchamp's  Fountain
was  an  assault  on  the  sacred  boundary  between  art  and  everyday  objects.  By
violating this  boundary,  his work  attacked  the  category  of "art"  itself. Another
work of Duchamp's  underscores  the  shocking violence  of his stance.  That  work
was  a  proposed  "reciprocal  readymade"  consisting  of  an  injunction  to  the
viewer:  "Use  a Rembrandt as an  ironing board." Duchamp's  oeuvre  is  aptly
called "anti-art." 123

least 

Anti-art  was  not  a  passing  creed.  Although  out  of  vogue  for  several
decades,  Duchamp's  work caught  the  attention of pop  artists like Rauschenberg
at  mid-century.  And  since  at 
the  1980s,  Duchamp  has  become
transcendent  in  his  influence.  Renowned  critic  and  philosopher  Arthur  Danto
describes  the  contemporary  art  world  as  almost  completely  "defined  by
Duchamp  as  its generative  thinker."'' 24  A  recent  poll  of five  hundred  art  critics
called  Duchamp's  Fountain "the  most  influential  work  of modem  art"  by  any
artist.125  Contemporary  artists  (postmodem  and  post-postmodem)  have  taken
up his destructive  spirit with a  vengeance.

.

.

.

the 

'destruction  of  destruction' 

For  instance,  critic  Alan  Liu  writes  that  the  strong  art  of the  future  "will
the  recognition  of  the
be  about 
destructiveness  in creation."' 26 He  argues that the  art  of destruction  has become
the  central  theme of digital  art,  evident, for example,  in art from collectives  like
Critical  Art  Ensemble,  which  makes  "hacktivism"  or  disturbance  art.12 7  These
artists  draw  on  a  rich  late  twentieth  century  history  of "Destruction  Art,"  the
name of the  school  associated  with  artist  Gustav  Metzger.  Jean Tinguely's  self-
destroying  sculptures  and  machine  happenings  are  another  paradigm.  For
example,  Tinguely  created  a  "machine  for  the  destruction  of sculptures"  that

123. 

For background,  see,  for example,  JANIS  MINK,  MARCEL  DUCHAMP,  1887-1968:  ART
AS  ANTI-ART  (1995);  HANS  RICHTER,  DADA:  ART  AND  ANTI-ART  (David  Britt  trans.,  1997)
(1965).

124.  ARTHUR  DANTO,  AFTER  THE  END  OF  ART  85  (1997)  [hereinafter  DANTO,  AFTER  THE

END  OF  ART].

125.  BBC  News,  Duchamp  Urinal  Tops  Survey,  Dec. 

1,  2004,  available  at

http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/arts/4059997.stm.

126.  Liu, supra note  119,  at  8-9
127. 

Id.

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

was itself later destroyed. 128

Walking  through  Chelsea  galleries  today,  one  can  sense  this  destructive
spirit.129  Consider  one  of  the  most  celebrated  shows  of  2007,  Turner  Prize
winner  Simon  Starling's  exhibition.13  Starling  took  a  boat  into the  water  and
hacked  it into pieces  until  it was  gone. The  "work  of art,"  such as  it is,  consists
of nothing  more  than  a  lone  slide  projector  showing  still  images  of Starling
destroying  his boat until it sinks. Two prominent group  shows from  the summer
of 2008  were  organized  to  display  destruction  as  a  mode  of artistic  creation.
"Cancelled,  Erased,  Removed,"  at  the  Sean  Kelly  Gallery,  showed  artists
whose  creative  process  depended  on  erasing  or  removing  images;  the  show
took  its  "conceptual  point  of departure  [from]  Robert  Rauschenberg's  Erased
de Kooning."' 31 "Who's  Afraid of Jasper  Johns,"  the  critical  hit  of the  summer
season,  was  a  meditation  on art as  a kind  of "vandalism  updated for  our digital
age. ''132  Inspired  by  a  notorious  attack  against  an  artwork,  the  mind-bending
show  consisted  of  one  exhibition  displayed  on  top  of  a  precise  replica  of a
previous  one  that had itself raised the issue of vandalism.'1 33

Destruction  is also at the heart  of a  controversy  unfolding  in New York. In
2007,  a  mysterious  vandal  began  attacking  the  work  of  street  artists  in
Brooklyn  by  throwing  colorful  buckets  of  paint  on  them.  The  vandal  was
quickly  dubbed  "the  Splasher."  His  choice  of target  was  not  run-of-the-mill
graffiti  but  rather  pieces  by  highly-acclaimed  street  artists,  such  as  Swoon' 3 4
and  Faile, 135  whose  works  appear  on  the  street---often  illegally-but  also  in
major  museums  and  galleries. 136  Although  we  don't  know  the  Splasher's

128.  A wide  range  of recent  artists,  from  Gordon  Matta-Clark,  to  Felix Gonzalez-Torres,  to
Urs  Fischer,  make  work  that seems  indebted  to Tinguely.  Cf Man  Ray's  1923  assemblage  Object
to  Be  Destroyed.  The  piece  was  stolen  and  destroyed.  Man  Ray  recreated 
it
Indestructible Object.

it,  naming 

129.  Once  again,  I  describe  these  works  not  because  they  necessarily  involve  technical
violations  of VARA  but rather  because  they expose  the  vital importance  of destruction  as a  mode
of creation in the contemporary  art world.

130.  Simon 

http://chelseaartgalleries.com/Casey+Kaplan/
Simon+Starling+2007.html.  Starling  used  the wooden pieces  chopped from  the boat to  fuel it as  it
sank.

Starling 

2007, 

131. 

Press  Release, 

Cancelled, 

Erased  &  Removed 

(June 

21, 

2008),

http://www.skny.com/exhibitions/2008-06-2  1_cancelled-erased-and-removed/pressrelease/.

132.  R.C.  Baker,  Digital Vandalism  at Shafrazi  Gallery, VILLAGE  VOICE,  June  3,  2008,

available at http://www.villagevoice.com/2008-06-03/art/lies-all-lies/.

133.  Roberta  Smith,  When Artworks Collide, N.Y.  TIMES,  May  16,  2008,  at  E25.  The  show
was  inspired,  in part, by the history of the  Tony Shafrazi  Gallery where  it took place:  Shafrazi  rose
to  fame  for  defacing  Picasso's  Guernica. See infra note  153  and  accompanying  text.  The  title  of
the  show  also  alludes  to  a  famous  painting  that  had  been  vandalized,  Barnett  Newman's  Who's
Afraid of Red, Yellow  and Blue? Furthermore,  the underlying  exhibition,  featuring  four prominent
graffiti  artists,  also  implicated  vandalism;  some  of their  works  originally  appeared  in  subway
stations  and other public  spaces.

134.  Kirk Scmple,  Lawbreakers, Armed with Paint and Paste; Underground Artists Take to

the Streets, N.Y.  TIMEs,  July 9,  2004,  at  B1.

Id.

135. 
136.  Colin  Moynihan,  Defacer with  Mystery Agenda Is Attacking Street Art, N.Y.  TIMES,

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

identity,  we  do  know  that  he137 considers  himself  an  artist.  His  manifesto,
deposited  at  the  site  of  his  attacks,  includes  the  motto  "The  passion  for
destruction  is  a  creative  passion."' 38  The  art  collective  Faile  offered  an
extraordinary  response  to the  Splasher's  attacks  on their  artworks.  Faile  created
the  Splasher's
new  pieces 
modifications.  A  member  of Faile  said, "We're  going  to start  co-opting  it  and
just embracing  [the  attacks].' 39

the  violated  originals, 

incorporating 

from 

This is a  vision of art completely at odds with the  moral rights regime. Art
becomes  a  dialogue  among  vandals,  in  which  destruction  and  creation  merge.
The  initial  artist/vandal  creates  work  by  "destroying"  property;  the  Splasher
mutilates  the  initial  artist's  work  in an  act of "creative  passion";  the  first  artist
builds  upon  the  previous  destruction,  modifying  it  to  create  yet  another
artwork.  In  my  view,  this  model  of creative  vitality  captures  the  ethos  of the
present  era. Yet  it is  worlds  away  from  the  model  of creation  that moral rights
law  presumes.

The  interest  in  destruction  is  so  pervasive  in  contemporary  art  that,  in
2002,  French  critic Bruno  Latour  declared:  "Art has become  a  synonym  for the
destruction  of  art."' 14 0  In  fact,  as  I  argue  in  Part  IV,  the  defining  feature  of
contemporary  art  has been its  attack  on the  coherence  of "art"  as a  category.  In
this  light, physical  attacks  against  art objects  can  be understood  as  particularly
valuable  forms of expression.  Moral  rights law therefore  rests  on a vision  of art
at  odds  with  contemporary  art practice.  The  law  obstructs  rather  than  enables
the  creation of art.

I  return  to  the  contemporary  assault  on  "art"  in  Part  IV.  In  the  next
Section,  however,  I  look  at  art's  past,  briefly  exploring  the  importance  of
destruction  in art  history.  Although  the metaphorical  (and  sometimes  physical)
destruction  of  art  is  a  central  tenet  of  postmodernism,  art's  reliance  on
destruction has a  longer history. Destruction  was also  central to modernism,  the
very movement  against  which contemporary  art rebels.

2. Situating Destruction within the History ofArt

itself  may  be  constituted  of several  interventions  ....
"'Creation' 
Some  of  these  interventions  aimed  at  lengthening  [the  object's]
. at  terminating  it,  and  many-maybe  all-at
existence,  others  .
modifying  it."

.

-Dario  Gamboni

14 1

Mar.  7,  2007,  at B2.

137.  Rumor has it that the  Splasher is  a  man.
138.  Alex  Mindlin,  For  Vandals,  an  Ironic Target: Street  Artists, N.Y.  TImES,  Jan.  28,

2007,  §  14, at  6.

Id. (quoting a member  of Faile).

139. 
140.  Latour, supra note  1, at 21.
141. 

GAMBONI,  supra note 2,  at 25.

CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

"The  desire  to create  art  always  expresses itself as  the desire  to destroy
art."

-NewYorkisDead.biz 

(Gavin Brown Gallery)

"I want to assassinate  painting."

-Joan  Mir614 2
Describing  how  "intimate  destructivity  has  always  been  to  creativity,"
Alan  Liu writes that "the  history  of art is  incomprehensible  without  a matching
history  of  'de-arting. ' '" 143  Certainly,  one  could  see  destruction  as  a  central
principle  of twentieth  century  modernism.  Inherent  in  the  idea  of the  avant-
garde,  valorized  by  modernism,  is  the  idea  of continually  breaking  with  the
past.  Modernism depended  on  shattering  tradition;  the progress  of art entailed  a
kind  of metaphorical  iconoclasm.' 44

Other  periods  in  the  history  of  art  have  also  pictured  destruction  as
integral  to  creation.  In  the  nineteenth  century,  for example,  the  idea  arose  that
artists  needed  to  destroy  past  art  to  free  themselves  from  its  weight.  A  blank
slate  would  liberate 
the  individual  genius  to  create  something  new.  Thus
novelist  Joris-Karl  Huysmans  wrote  at  the  turn  of the  century:  "Fire  is  the
essential  artist  of our time.  And the  architecture  of the  [past]  so pitiful  when  it
is  raw, becomes  imposing,  almost  splendid,  when  it  is  baked., 145 Similarly,  in
1851,  anarchist  philosopher  Pierre-Joseph  Proudhon  called  for  burning
museums.  He  explained  that  it was  only "once  the  past was  forgotten  [that]  we
would  do  something."' 146  One  striking  modem  example  of  the  idea  that
creativity  requires  destruction  of the  past  comes  from  Jasper  Johns.  While  he
was  still  an  unknown  artist,  Johns  decided  to  destroy  all  of his  work  "with  a
view  to  purging  himself of influence." 147  The  strategy  seems  to  have  worked.
After  destroying  his  art,  Johns  had  a  dream  about  painting  a  flag.  Thus  began
his iconic  flag  series,  the  work that established  his greatness. 148

142.  MoMA.org,  Exhibitions  2008,  Joan  Mir6:  Painting  and  Anti-Painting  1927-1937,
http://www.moma.org/exhibitions/exhibitions.php?id=3993 
(last  visited  Nov.  24,  2008).  A
reviewer of this  exhibition  wrote:  "Amputate  tradition, torture  the past,  terrorize  the present. The
impulse  to  destroy  was  part  of what"  defined  early  modem  art.  Holland  Cotter,  Mir6,  Serial
Murderer ofArtistic Conventions, N.Y. TIMES,  Oct. 30,  2008,  at  C23.

143.  Liu, supra note  119,  at 327.
144.  Although  I note a commonality  between  modernism  and postmodemism,  their targets
of  destruction  differ.  Modernism  destroyed  tradition, not 
the  artist/genius.  Postmodernism
destroyed  the  latter  as  part  of a  broader  attack  on  individuality.  One  might  also  consider  the
ascetic,  anti-representational  turn  in  art,  evident  in  works  by  such  varied  artists  as  Mondrian,
Kandinsky, Rothko,  Hoffmann, Reinhardt,  Motherwell, as  evidencing an  iconoclastic impulse.

145. 

J-K  HUYSMANS,  CERTAINS  29  (1889)  (quote  translated  from  the  original  French  by

Amy Adler).

146. 

JAMES  M.  THOMPSON,  TWENTIETH  CENTURY  THEORIES  OF  ART  277  (1990).
Similarly,  Italian  Futurists  such  as Marinetti  wanted  to demolish  museums.  GAMBONI,  supra note
2,  at 259.

147.  Louis  Menand, 

Capture 

the 

Flag, 

SLATE, 

Oct. 

30, 

1996,

http://www.slate.com/id/2905.

148. 

Id.

20091

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

that  mutilation  would  revive  art  that  had  been  entombed 

Another rationale  for destruction in the  name  of advancing  art  arose  in the
modem  period:  modifying  the  original artists'  efforts would renew  works  of art
and  rescue  them  from  death  in  the  museum/mausoleum.1 49  As  artist  Felix
Gmelin  observed,  when  we  turn  a  picture  into  a  "masterpiece,  the  museum
the  picture  historic,  thereby  rendering  it  invisible  in  the
helps  to  make 
present." 150  Asgor  Jorn,  a  post-war  artist,  took  this  view  a  step  further,
in
contending 
museums.  He  argued  that  artists should  "improve  old canvases,  collections  and
entire  museums"  by  painting  over  pictures. 151  This  vandalism  would  not
destroy the  works;  rather,  it would  "preserve  their  actuality  and ...  help them
from  falling into  oblivion."' 52  When  art  critic  Tony  Shafrazi  defaced  Picasso's
Guernica by  spray-painting  on  it  the  year  after  Picasso's  death,  his  actions
could  be  interpreted  as  putting  this  theory  into  practice.  He  claimed  that  he
attacked the  painting because  he  wanted to  "bring the  art  absolutely  up to  date,
to retrieve  it from art history and give it  life.' 53 In a similar gesture, artist  Hans
Haacke  broke replicas  of Duchamp's readymades  because  he  believed they had
been transformed  from vital  art into "relics." 154

the 

inspiration 

for  Fluxus. 155  The  recent  and 

There  is  even  a  movement  in  contemporary  scholarship  to  reclaim
iconoclasm  itself as  a  form  of art.  There  is  precedent  for  this position.  One  of
the  leading  artists  of the  Fluxus  movement  of the  1960s  described  Byzantine
important
iconoclasm  as 
"Iconoclash"  exhibition in Germany  began  from  this principle.  Bruno  Latour,  a
curator  of  the  show,  wrote  that  the  exhibition's  premise  was  to  picture
iconoclasm  as  not  merely  the  destruction  of art, but  rather  as  a  "source  of new
images."'1 56  In the  same  vein,  W.J.T.  Mitchell,  the father  of the  field of "visual
studies"  wrote  in  2005:  "[I]conoclasm  is  more  than  just  the  destruction  of
images;  it is  a  'creative  destruction'  in which  a  secondary  image  of defacement
image  is
or  annihilation  is  created  at  the  same  moment  that  the  'target' 

149.  Adomo  called  museums  "sepulchers"  of art.  THEODOR  W.  ADORNO,  Valkry  Proust
Museum,  in  PRISMS  175,  181  (Samuel  &  Shierry  Weber  trans.,  1981)  (1967).  See  also CRIMP,
supra note 116.

Dario  Gamboni,  Image to Destroy, Indestructible Image, in  ICONOCLASH,  supra note

150 

1, at 88,  127.

151. 
152. 
153. 

Id. at  124.
Id.
Id. Although most in the art world  decry  attacks  on  art, there have  been defenders.  For
example,  in  1997,  performance  artist  Alexander  Brener  sprayed  a  dollar  sign  on  a  Malevich
painting  in  Amsterdam,  calling  his  action  "'a  political  and  cultural  action against  corruption  and
elitism  in culture."'  Id. at  127.  The  editor  and  publisher  of Flash Art defended  the  artist/vandal,
calling  his arrest  "an  offense  to the  artist's freedom  of expression."  Id.

Id. at  124.

154. 
155.  KEN  FRIEDMAN,  THE  FLUxus  READER  95  (Ken Friedman  ed.,  1998).  Fluxus  was  an
international,  experimental  art  movement  dating  from  the  early  1960s.  A  highly  eclectic
movement  that  traversed  different  media,  Fluxus  drew  on  (and  in  some  cases  influenced)  other
artistic  movements  including  performance  art, conceptual  art and Dada.

156.  Latour, supra note  1, at 21  (emphasis  omitted).

CALIFORNIA  LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

attacked."' 157

than  the  subsequent  one  produced  from 

This  history suggests  that moral rights'  quest to preserve physical  integrity
overlooks  the  central  role  of metaphorical  and  indeed  physical  destruction  in
art.  I  do  not  claim,  however,  that  destruction  and  mutilation  are  always
valuable.  In  many cases,  perhaps  most, it  may turn  out  that  the  original  object
its  destruction.158
was  "better" 
Furthermore,  there  is  a  long  and  sinister  history  of attacks  on  art,  shown,  for
example,  in the  Taliban's  recent,  tragic  destruction  of the  Bamiyan Buddhas  in
Afghanistan  or the  hateful  Nazi  attacks  on  "degenerate  art. ,159 But  this history
is  not  the  only  one.  At least  when  we  are  dealing  with  contemporary  art,  we
should  seek  a  deeper  and  more  complicated  understanding  of  integrity  and
destruction.  And  contemporary  art-art  created  since  June  1991-is  the  only
kind  of art  that  VARA  protects.  We  may  be  truer  to  the  spirit  of contemporary
art  if we  start  from the  premise  that it exists  to be  violated,  reworked,  and even
destroyed  rather than  to be  embalmed and  preserved just as the artist  intended.
Thus  the right  of integrity  imposes a cost  on art.  And as I argue  in the next

section, its  benefit to art is  surprisingly less  significant  than we  might expect.

C. The Diminished Value ofAuthenticity and Preservation

"Whatever  art is,  it is  no longer something primarily to be looked  at."

-Arthur  Danto, After the End ofArt 160

Have  you  ever  seen the  Mona  Lisa?  Isn't it disappointing?  There  you  are,
seeking  to be  in the  presence  of greatness,  and instead,  there  are  fifty people  in
your way,  cameras  whirring,  and there's  bulletproof glass  blocking  your  view,
and the  picture itself is so  surprisingly  small. But perhaps  the biggest letdown is
that  you've  already  seen  the  Mona  Lisa,  even  if this  is  your  first  time  in the
Louvre.  You've  seen  the  Mona  Lisa  so  many  times  that  you  can't even  "see"
the  real  one  anymore.  What  do we hope  for when we  go  to  see  it  at the  Louvre
in  the  first  place?  What  is  this magic  we  seek  in the  presence  of the  painting?
Perhaps  we  hope  that  the  thing  itself will  exceed  anything  conveyed  by  its
reproductions.  Perhaps  we  hope  that by  being  near the  original  object,  we  will
be  in the  presence  of Leonardo's  genius.  It is  as  if we  seek  some  sort of grace.

157.  W.J.T. MITCHELL,  WHAT  Do PICTURES  WANT?  18  (2005).
158.  Of  course,  as  I  discuss  in  Part  V,  defining  which  is  "better"  is  extraordinarily
complex.  We  would  have  to  worry  about  who  should  make  the  determination,  and  also  when  it
should be made,  since our estimation  of art often shifts  dramatically over  time.

See  GAMBONI,  supra  note  2,  at  45-47  (discussing  Nazi  attacks  on  so  called
"degenerate  art");  LATOUR,  supra note  1, at  18-19  (describing  Taliban  destruction  of Buddhas  in
2001).

159. 

160.  DANTO,  AFTER  THE END  OF ART, supra note  124,  at  16;  see also SYLVtRE  LOTRINGER
& PAUL  VIRILIO,  THE  ACCIDENT  OF  ART  73  (Michael  Taormina  trans.  2005)  ("The  visual  arts no
longer speak  to the eyes.").

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

Walter Benjamin  would say that we  seek the painting's  "aura."

Yet  as  Benjamin  presciently  saw,  endless  reproductions  of unique  works
of art  would ultimately  destroy  their  aura.'  61  Writing  in  1936,  Benjamin  could
never have  imagined  how true his  vision would become  in our  digital culture  of
endless  copying.  There  is no  more  aura.  We can't fully  experience  the  magic of
the  Mona  Lisa because  it  is  gone;  it  is  a  casualty  of the triumph  of mechanical
reproduction. 162 And  it is  not only  mechanical  reproduction-with  its relentless
mediation  of  our  vision-that  has  ushered  in  this  loss.  The  loss  might  also
come from the  very act of honoring  and revering the work. As  noted above,  one
artist  warned  that  when  we  turn  a  picture  into  a  masterpiece,  we  render  it
"invisible in the  present."'163

This  reality  has  influenced  my analysis  of moral  rights  law.  Moral  rights
law  seeks to preserve  unique objects,  but  these  objects are  already  in some  way
lost.  The  desire  to preserve  the  real  thing  made  sense  when  moral  rights  were
bom  in  nineteenth  century  France.  As  Professor  Merryman  has  argued,
preserving  works  of art  exactly  as  the  artist  intended  them  is  crucial  because
S  ,,164
"[w]e  yearn  for  the  authentic,  for  contact  with  the  work  in  its  true  version.
But if we  cannot  see the  "true"  Mona  Lisa anymore,  the value  of preserving  the
painting  diminishes.  At  the  same  time,  those  very  reproductions  that  destroyed
the  aura  of the original  have  become rivals  to the  thing  itself. To  the  extent that
we  want  to  preserve  great  works  of  art  in  order  to  protect  our  shared
vocabulary-the  primary  rationale  advanced in moral  rights scholarship  for the
in  preservation-reproductions  are  no  longer  as  paltry  an
public  interest 
alternative  to  the  real  thing  as  we  might  believe. 165  Furthermore,  since  these

161.  Walter  Benjamin,  The  Work  of Art  in  the  Age  of Mechanical  Reproduction,  in
ILLUMINATIONS  217  (Hannah  Arendt  ed.,  Harry  Zohn  trans.,  1968)  (1955)  ("The  situations  into
which  the  product  of mechanical  reproduction  can  be  brought  may  not  touch  the  actual  work  of
[T]hat  which withers  in  the  age  of
art,  yet  the  quality  of its presence  is always  depreciated  .... 
mechanical  reproduction  is the  aura  of the  work of art.").

In  1911,  after the Mona Lisa was  stolen, people  lined  up to  look  at the empty space  on
the  wall  where  it  had been  in the  Louvre.  See  RoY  MCMULLEN,  MONA  LISA:  THE  PICTURE  AND
THE  MYTH  200 (1975).  I  believe  our  modem  pilgrimage  to  the  painting  bears  an  echo  of this-
among  the things  we look  at is  a marker  of what is  lost.

162. 

163.  Gamboni,  supra note 150,  at  127  (emphasis  supplied).
164.  Merryman,  supra note  5, at  1041.  Cf  HAL  FOSTER,  Preface to THE  ANTI-AESTHETIC
10  (Hal  Foster  ed.,  1983)  (describing  shift  from  viewing  artifacts  as  modernist  "works"  to
"contingent"  postmodernist "texts").  It  follows that the  importance  of preservation  diminishes.

165. 

I  am  most  comfortable  with  this  argument  when  applied  to  painting  and  two
dimensional  art  forms.  Sculpture  and  architecture  pose  deeper  problems  because  of the  difficulty
their  spatial  components  into  two  dimensions.  (Sculptures  are  more  easily
of  translating 
reproduced  in  three  dimensions  than  architecture,  but  neither  can be  satisfactorily  reproduced  in
the  2D  world  of  cyberspace.)  Finally,  my  argument  responds  to  the  claim  in  moral  rights
scholarship  that preservation  is important because  it assures  our common vocabulary.  Thus I  focus
on  the  aesthetic  value  of  works  of  art.  Reproductions  deny  scholars  important  historical
information  (as  well  as  other  kinds  of  valuable  information,  for  example  about  authenticity).
Furthermore,  although  the  aura  is  lost,  we  don't  easily admit  it.  Perhaps  the  sense  of authenticity
that many  feel  before  the  "real  thing"  might still be  valuable,  even  if it is  based  on what  I believe

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

reproductions  are  so  widely  available,  and  to  the  extent  we  cannot  see  the
"real"  Mona  Lisa  anymore,  the  value  of the  original  as  opposed  to  the  copy
diminishes.  Yes,  I  know  that  a  digital  reproduction  can't  convey  lushness,
texture,  the true color of paint,  the power  of scale,  and other  unique aspects of a
particular  work. 166 Of course,  I  recognize  the  limits  of reproductions  compared
to  the  real  thing.  But  we  also  must  recognize  the  limits  of the  real  thing  in a
world of reproductions.1 67

In  fact,  although 

they  certainly  don't 

inveigh  against  preservation,
theorists as diverse  as Jean  Baudrillard,168 Ludwig Feuerbach,169  and Bill  Miller
have  observed  that  we  sometimes prefer reproductions  to originals.  Miller,  for
example,  describes  our "shame  of having felt  more  for a  photo  or reproduction
than  for the thing  itself."' 70

There  are  further reasons  why the  concept  of integrity  in moral rights  law
seems  less  urgent  to  me  than  it might  once  have. This  is  because  when  dealing
with  contemporary  art  works-again,  the  only  kind  that  VARA  protects-we
must  consider the  difference  between  what "art"  means today and what it meant
in  the  past. The  word  "art"  used to  invoke  beauty,  mastery  and transcendence.
But postmodern  art,  drawing on  Dada  and Pop, moved art from  the realm  of the
beautiful,  physical,  or even  visual  to  the  realm  of the  conceptual.  Arthur  Danto
writes  that in  contemporary  art,  "visuality  drops  away,  as  little relevant  to  the
essence  of art  as  beauty  proved  to  have  been." 171  Compare  the  experience  of
viewing  a  Duchamp  urinal  with  the  experience  of  viewing  a  Rembrandt
painting. I  am not  saying that  viewing  the  former  is  devoid  of value  (although
Duchamp  himself  was  dismayed  when  people 
evaluated  Fountain
aesthetically). 172  But,  in  contrast  to  the  Rembrandt,  it is  clear  that  a  great  deal
of the  value  of the  Duchamp  is  conveyed  simply  by describing  it  and  how  it
was made  (or not)  by  the  artist:  "Duchamp  took a manufactured  urinal  and  put

is a  fantasy.

167. 

166.  Of  course,  good  digital  reproductions  could  reproduce  scale  and  color.  And  non-
digital  reproductions-forgeries,  for  example-can  capture  texture  and  can  be  astonishingly
convincing.

Important  questions arise:  if the  aura is  gone,  why do artists need to  destroy originals?
Won't  copies  suffice?  I think  that  someday,  perhaps,  copies  will  suffice.  Indeed  the  interest  in
destruction  may soon  wane.  We  are  in  a moment  of transition  as  we  are  bombarded  by  limitless
reproduction.  It  is  hard  to  predict  how  we  will  one  day  regard  the  notions  of  "original"  and
"copy."  But  for  now,  many  of  us  still  believe  in  the  aura,  or  at  least  still  long  for  it.  The
destruction  of the  original  still  hurts. Thus,  the  shock  of such destruction  forces  us,  perhaps  better
than any other conceivable  artistic action,  to confront the  aura's  decline.

168. 

See  Jean  Baudrillard,  The  Precession of Simulacra,  in  ART  AFTER  MODERNISM:

RETHINKING  REPRESENTATION  253  (Brian  Wallis ed.,  1984).

169. 

LUDWIG  FEUERBACH,  Preface to  THE  ESSENCE  OF  CHRISTIANITY  (Harper  Torchbook
ed.,  George  Eliot trans.,  1957)  (stating that our  era "prefers  the  image to the  thing, the  copy to the
original,  the representation  to the reality").

170.  WILLIAM I.  MILLER,  FAKING  IT  161  (2003).
171. 
172.  Duchamp  complained  in  dismay  that  critics  "admire  [my  readymades]  for  their

DANTO,  AFTER THE  END  OF  ART,  supra note  124,  at  16.

aesthetic  beauty."  Id. at  84.

20091

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

it  in  a  gallery  space."  Given  this  move  of  art  from  the  physical  to  the
conceptual  realm,  the  value  of  preserving  physical  objects  that  artists  make
today is  diminished.

I 

saw 

of 

the 

evidence 

abundant 

Indeed,  much  contemporary  art reflects  this  loss of interest  in  the  object.
The  curators  of the  recent  Whitney  Biennial 173  described  two  major  themes  of
the  show  as  "failure"  and  "ephemerality." 174  On  a  recent  trip  to  Chelsea
theoretically-touted
galleries, 
"dematerialization  of art."' 175  I saw gallery  after gallery  of works  that  reveled  in
their  physical  contingency:  self-destroying  boats,  gnawed  piles  of chocolates,
and  crumpled  notes  casually  tacked  to  the  wall.  Of course  there  are  still  many
artists  who  continue  to  make  lushly  beautiful,  virtuosic  work.  But  often  their
work  exists  on  conceptual  as  well  as  formal  levels. 176  For  example,  the  "hot"
contemporary  painter  John  Currin  isn't just  a  great  painter;  part  of the point  of
his  work  is  that  he  paints  so  masterfully  after  painting  was  pronounced  dead.
Currin  paints  as  if there  were  quotation  marks  around  the  word  "painter,"
marking  it off as a  sly conceptual  move.

Finally,  moral  rights'  focus  on  preservation  glosses  over  what  a  deeply
unstable  concept  "preservation"  is.  As  noted  above,  some  critics  and  artists
maintain  that  "preservation"  of  a  work  in  a  museum  is  itself  a  form  of
destruction.  Adorno  called  museums  "sepulchers"; 177  Pissarro  called  them
"necropolises."' 178  Some  artists  intend  their  work  to  age  ungracefully,  to  show
the  vagaries  of time.  Brice  Marden  has  directed  preservationists  not  to  repair
accidental  scuffs  and  other  damage  done  to  his  monochromatic  paintings.' 79
For  other  artists,  part  of the  point  of the  work  may  be  that  it will  fall  apart.
George  Herms  called  his  early  assemblage  works  an  "indictment  of
materialism";  preserving  them  might then be a  contradiction.! 80

Sculptor  Eva  Hesse  did  pioneering  work  in  the  1960s  in  fragile,  new
materials  such  as  resin,  latex,  and  fiber.' 8'  Hesse  died,  tragically  young,  in
1970.  Some  of her  sculptures  are  disintegrating;  they  may not  last.  Was  it part
of  the  art  that  the  pieces  would  degrade?  Or  was  it  her  intent  to  have  them
somehow  preserved?  Would  "preservation"  destroy  her  sculptures?  Would  we

173.  The  Whitney  Museum's  Biennial  exhibitions  are  important  attempts  to  capture  the
essence  of the  art world  every  two  years.  See Adler,  What's Left?,  supra note  48,  at  1543  n.181
(noting  importance  of Biennials).

174.  Holland  Cotter, Art's Economic Indicator, N.Y.  TIMES,  Mar.  7.  2008,  at  E31  (quoting

curators).

175.  See,  e.g.,  MARTHA  BUSKIRK,  THE  CONTINGENT  OBJECT  OF  CONTEMPORARY  ART

(2003).

176.  Or it exists  as commodity.  See infra Part IV.
177.  ADORNO,  supra note  149.
178.  GAMBONI,  supra note 2, at  256 (quoting Pissarro).
179.  Randy  Kennedy,  Giving the Artists a  Voice in  Preserving Their  Work,  N.Y.  TIMES,

June  29,  2006, at El.

Id.

180. 
181.  Lucy R. LIPPARD,  EVA  HESSE (1976).

CALIFORNIA LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

"preserve"  them  by  letting  them  fall  apart?' s2  The  answers  are  unclear.  The
uncertainties  surrounding  Hesse's work  raise  deeper  questions that moral rights
law  glosses  over:  should  the  artist's  wishes  always  determine  the  fate  of the
object?  What  is  the  value  of the  unique  physical  object  itself?. Does  the  work
cease  to be  authentic  if we "preserve"  it by re-creating  it, removing the  trace of
the  artist's  hand?  These  are  deeply  complex  questions.  Moral  rights  law
enshrines  a simplistic notion  of integrity  without recognizing  the  complexity  of
the concept.

THE END  OF ART:  DESTROYING  "ART"  AS  A CATEGORY

"There  seems to be something  in the  air that art is commerce  itself."

IV

"Art?  Isn't that a  man's name?"

Jasper  Johns1 83

-

-Andy  Warhol184

"Will the last painter please  turn off the  light when  leaving art?"

-Peter  Weibel, An  End to the  "End ofArt"18 5

Throughout  this essay, I have argued  that moral rights law  is incompatible
with  contemporary  artistic  practice  because  the  law  is  based  on  romantic  and
outdated  assumptions about art.  Here I want to confront  a deeper  problem at the
heart of moral  rights law:  the  doctrine's very  existence  is premised  on  the  idea
that  "the  bond between  an artist  and his work is  different  from that between  any
other craftsman  and  his product." ' 8 6 In my view, this premise is problematic.

What  is  so  special  about visual art? 18 7  Why do  we  grant it special  rights  and
treat  it  differently  from  other  objects,  excepting  it  from  the  normal  rules  of
property  and  contract?  At  its  heart,  moral  rights  law  rests  on  the  notion  that  a
work  of  visual  art  is  not  merely  another  product  in  our  capitalist  society.

182.  From  Jean  Tinguely's  self  destroying  sculptures,  described  supra,  to  Robert
Smithson's  earthworks,  some  artworks  are  designed  to  be  ephemeral.  Others  are  meant  to
constantly  change.  For  example,  Hesse  made  some  sculptures  that  would  change  with  each
installation. 
at
http://www.guggenheimcollection.org/site/artist-work-md_63_1  .html.

Expansion 

Expanded 

available 

See, 

e.g., 

(1969), 

183.  Carol  Vogel,  The  Gray Areas  of Jasper Johns, N.Y.  TiMEs,  Feb.  3,  2008,  at  C1

(quoting Johns).

184.  ARTHUR  C.  DANTO,  ENCOUNTERS  AND  REFLECTIONS  286-87  (1990)  [hereinafter

DANTO,  ENCOUNTERS].

185. 

Peter  Weibel,  An  End to  the  "End of Art"?  On  the  Iconoclasm of Modern Art,  in

ICONOCLASH,  supra note  1, at 614.

186.  Cohn,  supra note 32, 69-70.
187.  Hansmann  and  Santilli justify  the special  treatment  of art  by explaining that  "creators
of..  . 'art'.  . . typically  [create]  unique  and  highly  individual  works  that  require substantial  skill
and  effort,  [and]  commonly  feel  a  peculiarly  strong  attachment"  to  their  work.  Hansmann  &
Santilli,  supra note 37,  at  103.

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

Instead,  it is  alive  with the  creative  spirit of the  individual  genius/artist  who,  to
quote  the  Second Circuit,  "injects"  himself into the  work.18 8  His interests  in the
work are  loftier  and richer than mere  pecuniary  ones.  Indeed they transcend  his
individual  interests  and  become  interests  shared  by  the  public.  The  mundane
laws  of  copyright  protect  only  economic  interests.  They  could  never  fully
capture  what  the  artist  and  all  of us  value  about  artistic  expression.  Thus  we
must make special  rules for works of art.

But does  visual  art as  a  category  merit  this  special  treatment?  I  think  the
answer  might  be  no.  It  once  seemed  obvious  that  there  was  a  distinction
between  art and  other  objects.  But  that  is  no  longer  the  case.  Indeed,  I  would
argue  that  the  incoherence  of the  category  of "art"  has  become  the  subject of
contemporary  art. The  lack  of distinction  between  art and other  objects is now  a
central  preoccupation  in contemporary  art.

Moral  rights  law  thus  protects  art  under  a  justification  that  is  the  very
target  of  the  art  it  purports  to  protect.  Think  back  to  the  discussion  of
Duchamp's urinal in Part  III, the  piece  selected by  critics-as  the most influential
work  of  modem  art,  the  work  that  defines  the  ethos  of  our  era.  Earlier  I
discussed  Duchamp  to  establish  the  central  place  of destruction  in  art.  I  now
want  to focus  on  the  target of Duchamp's  destruction.  His  Fountain, like  most
of his oeuvre,  attacked  the  boundary  between  art and  everyday  objects.  And by
attacking  this  boundary,  Duchamp  began  to  destroy  the  category  of "art."' ' 89
Contemporary  artists  have renewed  his attack with  a vengeance. 190  Moral  rights
law, by  insisting  that  art  is  special,  reifies  the  boundary  these  artists  attack.  It
enshrines  in  law  the  precise  vision  of art  against  which  contemporary  artists
rebel.

It  is  important to note that  Duchamp's  attack  was  not an  initial  success.  In
fact,  it  was  rejected  by  artists  and  theorists  for  several  decades.  Instead,  a
different  vision  of art  flourished:  modernism.  Moral  rights  seem  rooted  in  this
vision. 191  To  understand  it,  contrast  Duchamp's  work  with  the  paradigmatic
artist  of mid-century  America,  Jackson  Pollock.  The  theory  of  moral  rights
makes  sense  when  we  think  of Pollock,  both because  of the  deeply  expressive
character of his  works  and because  they  fit  so clearly  within  the  lofty  realm  of
high art.

When we  think  of Pollock, we  think  not only  of his canvasses,  but  also  of
tortured  genius  in  an  existential
the  process  of  his  creation: 
confrontation  with  his  art,  pouring  his  soul  onto  canvas  in  a  burst  of creative

the  great, 

188.  Carter v. Helmsley-Spear,  Inc.,  71  F.3d  77, 81  (2d Cir.  1995).
189.  Adler,  Post-Modern Art,  supra note  48,  at  1364-69  (discussing  Duchamp  and  his

relation  to postmodemism).

190.  Once  again,  I  should note  that by  emphasizing  the  importance  of this movement,  I  do

not mean to claim  that it is  universal  in contemporary art. See supra note  118.

191.  And in romanticism,  as I  have  explained  above.

CALIFORNIA  LAW REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

angst. 192 Pollock's  paintings became  hallmarks  of modernism. Not only was his
work  a  formal  breakthrough, 93  it  was  also  a  record  of his  individual  will.  It  is
easy  to  see  why  we  would  consider  Pollock's'  art  "an  expression  of  his
innermost  being. ' 94  Pollock's  paintings,  aptly  called  "action  paintings,"  are  a
record of his transcendent  struggle;  we  feel him  in his work.

Pollock's paintings  belonged  firmly  in the  domain  of high  art  as  opposed
to popular  culture.  Indeed, the  boundary  between  these  realms  was  an  essential
feature  of  modernism.  The  defining  characteristic  of late  modernism  was  its
insistence on  the purity and  sanctity  of art.' 95 For  example,  Clement Greenberg,
the critic  who ruled mid-century  American  art with  "papal  authority"'196 insisted
that  "art  . . .in  its  'purity'  [would]  find  the  guarantee  of  its  standards  of
quality."'

' 97

It was  against  this heroic  backdrop  that  artists  renewed  Duchamp's  attack
on  the  category  of "art."  The  revival  began  in  the  1950s  and  60s  with  artists
like  Rauschenberg,  discussed  above,  and  Jasper  Johns.  But  no  one  was  more
important  in  this regard  than  Andy Warhol,  who  attacked  the  idea  that  art was
somehow  worthy  of more  reverence  than other  objects.  Instead  of the  tortured
artist baring his  soul on canvas  as  an expression  of his innermost being,  Warhol
gave  us  the  vacant  artist,  reproducing  celebrity  photographs,  Brillo  boxes  and
cans  of soup,  rolling  them  off the  production  line  in  the  studio  he  called  the
"Factory."  Warhol  did  not only  render  consumer  products  as art;  he  also  made
art  into  a  consumer  product.  He  turned  the  hallowed  artist  into  just  another
businessman.  Warhol's  subject  matter  and  his  technique  were  depersonalized
and commercial.  In  his  Factory,  he  mass-produced photo-silkscreens  that  never
even  touched  the  romantic  hand  of the  artist.  (In  modernism,  the  artist's  touch
was the  guarantor  of his  sincerity  and  presence,  investing  the  canvas  with  his
magic.)  Boasting  of his  lack  of connection  with  his  own  objects,  addressing  a
group of admiring  interviewers,  Warhol  said:  "Why  don't you  ask my  assistant
Gerry Malanga  some questions?  He  did a  lot of my paintings."' 198 No wonder de
Kooning was  rumored to have  uttered to Warhol  at  a  cocktail  party:  "You're  a

192.  This  is  primarily  because  the  pictures  themselves-action  paintings-record  the
artist's  movement,  but  also  because  Pollock  was  famously  photographed 
in  the  process  of
painting.  When  Life  featured  him  in  1949,  he  became  a  "pinup  of  seething  manhood."  Peter
Schjeldahl, American Abstract: Real Jackson Pollock, NEW YORKER,  Jul.  31,  2006.

193.  That  is,  reducing painting  to line  and  to action.
194.  To  quote  Merryman's justification  for  the  special  treatment  of art  in moral rights  law.

MERRYMAN  & ELSEN,  supra note 24,  at 423.

See Adler, Post-Modern Art, supra note  48,  at  1363-64.

195. 
196.  Barry  Gewen,  State of the Art, N.Y.  TIMES,  Dec.  11,  2005,  §  7  (Book  Review),  at  28

(quoting art historian  Robert Rosenblum).

197.  Clement  Greenberg,  Modernist  Painting, in  MODERN  ART  AND  MODERNISM:  A

CRITICAL  ANTHOLOGY  5,  6 (Francis  Frascina  & Charles  Harrison  eds.,  1982).

198. 

CAROLI  E  A.  JONES,  MACHINE  IN  THE  STUDIO  422  n.35  (1996)  (quoting  interview

with  Warhol).

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

killer of art:  you're a killer of beauty."' 199

The  present  era  owes  its  spirit  to  Warhol. ° °  Consider  the  trend  toward
artists  working  as  collectives  and under  fictional  identities.  For example,  Reena
Spaulings,  the  toast  of  the  last  Whitney  Biennial,  is  a  fictional  artist  (and
dealer). 2° 1 A  shifting  group  of collaborators  produce  "Spaulings's"  work.  Like
so  much  contemporary  work,  Spaulings's  art 
is  often  manufactured
commercially,  emphasizing  the  artist's  distance  from  the  process  of creation.
For  example,  "her"  Biennial  piece  was  a  manufactured  store  canopy  that  the
"artist"  ordered  from  a  Chinatown  company.20 2  Similarly,  the  Bernadette
Corporation,  another  prominent  Whitney 
is  also  a  shifting
collaborative  that  brands  itself  a  corporate  entity. 
There  is  no  artist.  Or,  if
there  is, the  artist is  a corporation  and its work just another  product.

"artist," 

203

What  are the implications  of this shift  in art  for moral rights?  Moral rights
law  depends  on  and  glorifies  a  line  between  art  and  everyday  objects  that  no
longer  exists.  The  New  York  Times  recently  reported  that  youth  culture  now
views  brands  as  "an  artistic  medium."  Eschewing  the  non-existent  or  at  least
tired  category  of "art,"  future  "artists"  may  find  their  medium  in  consumer
4
products,  making  T-shirts  and  sneakers  instead  of paintings  and  sculptures. 2
0
Indeed,  young  artists  seem  to  embrace  commercialism  in  a  casual  way  that
previous  generations  would have  considered  heresy.  Downtown  art  star  du jour
Dash  Snow  maintains  his  hipster  "cred"  while  modeling  for  AG  jeans. 20 5
Richard  Prince, 
is  busily
collaborating  on  a  handbag  line  with  Marc  Jacobs,  while  Takashi  Murakami's
latest  exhibition  featured  a  Murakami-Louis  Vuitton  boutique  in the  middle  of
the  Brooklyn  Museum.20 6  Of course,  Warhol's  spirit reigns  over  this merger  of
retail  and  art.  It  was  Warhol  who  wrote  that  "[b]eing  good  in  business  is  the

fresh  from  his  Guggenheim  one-man  show, 

199.  VICTOR  BOCKRIS,  WARHOL:  THE  BIOGRAPHY  320  (1989).
200.  And to his  inspiration  in Duchamp.  Danto wrote  that  we  live  in the  "age  of Warhol."
DANTO,  ENCOUNTERS,  supra note  184,  at  293.  Auction  prices  reflect  this.  Paul  Virilio  wrote:
"When  you look  at  Christie's or  Sotheby's  auction  prices,  Rembrandt  comes  after  Warhol,  Monet
after  Duchamp."  LOTRINGER  & VIRILIO,  supra note  160,  at 64.

201. 

CHRISSIE  ILES  &  PHILIPPE  VERGNE,  WHITNEY  BIENNIAL  2006:  DAY  FOR  NIGHT  334
(2006).  This  model  of  production  raises  significant  questions  not  addressed  here  about  the
necessity  of paternity  rights  as  incentives  to  creation.  More  fundamentally,  an  incompatibility
appears  between  the  paternity  right's  valorization  of the  author  and  the  rejection  of the  author  in
the kind  of contemporary art that Reena  Spaulings exemplifies.

Id.

202. 
203.  Reena  Spaulings is  in fact a creation/product  of the  Bernadette  Corporation. Id. at  178.
204.  Rob  Walker,  The Brand Underground, N.Y.  TIMES,  July  30,  2006  §  6 (Magazine),  at
29.  The recent  copyright  skirmish between  Barney's  "window dresser"  Simon Doonan,  and "high
artist"  Jack  Pierson  evidences  the  increasing  absurdity  of trying  to  separate  art  from  commerce.
Simon Doonan, How Did I Become the Typhoid Mary of the Art  World?, N.Y.  OBSERVER,  Apr.  17,
2006, (Culture),  at  1.

205. 

ILES  &  VERGNE,  supra  note  201,  at  330  (describing  Snow's  self-presentation  as
"artist/outlaw").  This  is remarkable  considering  that his  work is  all  about cred-documenting  his
life of coke,  sex,  and stealing.

206.  Ruth La  Ferla,  The Artist's Fall Collection, N.Y. TIMES,  Nov.  8, 2007, at  G1.

CALIFORNIA  LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

most fascinating  kind  of art." 207

208

215

to  conceptualize  art  as  a  category 

In  the  wake  of  soaring  prices  in  the  contemporary  art  market,  it  has
that  transcends
become  even  harder 
One could  argue  that  contemporary  art functions  less  as  creative
commerce. 
personal  expression  and  more  as  a  luxury  good  marketed  to  the  very  rich.209
Artworks  have  become  de  rigueur  trophies  for  newly  minted  billionaires. 210
Several  of  the  most  highly  acclaimed  contemporary  artists  make  work  that
simultaneously  critiques  and caters to this new market  reality. Consider  a recent
piece  by  Damien  Hirst,  a  critical  darling  and  the  best-selling  living  artist.211
Endeavoring  to  produce  the  "most  expensive  piece  of contemporary  art  ever
created, 212 Hirst  encrusted  a  skull  with diamonds  and  sold it to an investor  for
a hundred million dollars  cash.213 A critic said that  Hirst "uses  the  art market as
his medium., 21 4 Works  like  this participate  in and  mock  the market's  excesses.
And  collectors  want  more:  contemporary  art  now.  outpaces  old  masters  at
auction.  As  art  increasingly  functions  like  other  luxury  commodities,  this
shift undermines  the notion  that art  is distinct  from other products  and therefore
merits special protection.

Just  as  art  has  merged  with  commerce,  the  merger  between  art  and
pornography,  once  a  scandalous  assault  on  the  demarcation  between  art  and
non-art, high and  low, has  become so  commonplace  as to be  dull. 26 Artist John
Currin,  in  an  interview  about  his  latest  exhibition  with  its  de  rigueur  blend  of
art  and  hard-core  pornography  explains:  "It's  not  a  shock  tactic.  In  every  art
school  in  the  world  there's  a  guy  doing  porn. As  a  failed  shock  tactic,  that's
kind of interesting  to me." 217

The  foundation  of moral  rights  law  depends  on  a  boundary  between  art
and  other objects,  but  it is  this precise  boundary  that contemporary  artists have
that  art  has  been  (almost)  successful  in
attempted 
destroying  the  line  separating  art  from  everything  else.  In  an  ultimate  act  of

to  destroy.  I  believe 

207.  ANDY  WARHOL,  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ANDY  WARHOL  92  (1975).
208.  Ula  Ilnytzky,  No  End in  Sight for Soaring Art Market, ABC  News,  Dec.  25,  2007,

available at http://abcnews.go.com/Business/wireStory?id=4050458.

209.  Calvin  Tomkins, A  Fool for Art,  NEW  YORKER,  Nov.  12,  2007,  at 64-75.  For more  on
the  extraordinary  state  of the  art  market,  see Artforum's  recent  issue  devoted  to  the  subject.  Ai
Weiwei  et al.,  Art and Its Markets: A  Roundtable Discussion, ARTFORUM,  Apr.  2008.

210. 
211. 

Id.
Colin Gleadell,  Hirst's £16m  for  a  Slice  of Bacon,  TELEGRAPH,  Nov.  20,  2007,
(Features:  Art  Sales),  at  30.  Jeff Koons  and Hirst  have  both  laid  claim  to  the  title  of best-selling
living artist at auction.

212.  Id.
213.  William  Shaw,  The Iceman Cometh, N.Y. TIMES,  June  3,  2007 § 6  (Magazine),  at  30.
214.  Tomkins, A Fool for Art, supra note 209.
215.  Id.
216.  See Adler, Post-Modern Art, supra note  48,  at  1369-75  (analyzing  merger between  art

and  pornography).

217.  Karen  Rosenberg,  Influences: John Currin, N.Y.  MAG.,  Nov.  19,  2006,  available at

http://nymag.com/arts/art/features/24355/.

2009]

AGAINST MORAL  RIGHTS

iconoclasm,  the great achievement  of contemporary  art,  has  been  to destroy  the
category  of art as  we know  it.218

CONCLUSION

The  reader  may have  noticed  that  this  piece  resembles  the  art  I  describe:
an  exercise  in  destruction.  The  main  goal  of this Essay  has  been  to undermine
the  foundations  of moral  rights  law  and scholarship.  But here, I pause  briefly to
assess  what's  left  in  the  wake  of  my  assault.  Eliminating  moral  rights  and
treating  artworks  like  ordinary  objects  would  solve  some  of the  problems  I
describe,  but  it  would  also  leave  other  problems  unsolved  and,  in  fact,  create
new  ones. 219  Perhaps  the  most  significant  drawback 
to  any  "solution,"
including  eliminating  moral  rights  is  this:  problems  will  always  arise  from
enshrining  in law  a  particular,  inevitably  transitory,  understanding  of art.  I  am
wary  of blithely etching  in  stone  a  vision of art,  reflecting  the  current  moment,
that is  doomed to become just as  outmoded  as the romantic  concepts  underlying
moral  rights.  Furthermore,  artists  are  not  necessarily  the  best  ones  to  make
decisions  about  the  future  of their  art.  But  who  should  make  these  decisions?
And  when  should  they  be  made?  These  are  urgent  and  yet  extraordinarily
difficult  questions.  Whether  art  is  good  or bad,  valuable  or not,  varies  greatly
depending  on whom  you  ask  and when  you  ask.  Although  it's  unlikely,  it  may
turn  out  that  future  generations  reject  every  "important"  contemporary  artist
who  would  be  entitled  to  VARA's  protections.  It  wouldn't  be  the  first  time  in
the  history  of art  that  critics  got  it  "wrong"  or  that  an  entire  generation  was

218.  Or at least,  to have  come  close  to  destroying  it. Adorno  wrote  that "art  revolts  against
its  essential  concepts  while  at  the  same  time  being  inconceivable  without  them."  THEODOR  W.
ADORNO,  AESTHETIC  THEORY  465  (Gretel  Adorno  &  Rolf Tiedemann  eds.,  C.  Lenhardt  trans.,
1984)  (1970).  Has  the  contemporary  revolt  against  the  category  of art  been  so successful  that  it
has  destroyed  art's "essential  concepts"?  Has  contemporary  art turned "art"  into a  category  that is
"inconceivable"?

219.  Eliminating  moral  rights  would  have  the  virtue  of treating  art  like  other  objects  and
thus  would  comport  with  a  central  thematic  concern  of  contemporary  art.  It  would  also  free  art
from  the  control  of  the  artist.  But new  problems  would  arise:  most  prominently,  this  "solution"
would  merely  shift  control  to  buyers  and  to  the  art  market.  (For  those  artists  who  waive  their
moral  rights,  which  few  in  fact  do,  Landes,  supra note 37,  buyers  already  make  these  decisions.)
Eliminating  moral rights  would  expose  decisions  about  destruction  or  preservation  to  the  market,
which  is  notoriously  bad  at predicting  which art  will  stand  the  test of time.  See  supra notes  200,
209  and  accompanying  text.  The  overheated  current  art  market,  in  which  contemporary  artists
outsell  old  masters,  seems  particularly  unsound  to  many  critics.  See,  e.g.,  supra note  200  and
accompanying  text (describing  price disparity between  contemporary  works and  old masters).

My  goal in  this  Essay has  been  diagnostic  rather than prescriptive.  Nonetheless,  my diagnosis
points  to  how  difficult  any  solution  to  the  problem  of  moral  rights  will  be.  If  we  accept  my
argument,  that  preservation  as  achieved  through  moral  rights  laws  imposes  a  cost  on  artistic
innovation,  then  how  should  we  craft  a  set  of rules  that  strikes  the  proper  balance  between  the
conflicting  goals  of  artistic  preservation  and  innovation?  It  is  particularly  hard  to  answer  this
question  if you  start  from the  premise,  as I  do, that  no one-certainly  not judges, but not  even  art
critics  or the  art market-knows  what  art will stand the  test of time.

CALIFORNIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  97:263

completely  written  off.2 20  And the  art  that  the  current  generation  destroys  may
be judged "better"  by future  generations,  at  least for a  while.  For these  reasons,
it is  extremely  hard to  predict  what  kind  of rules  will  produce  the  "best"  art.  I
want  lawyers  and  legislators  who  draft  moral  rights  laws  to  be  sufficiently
daunted  by  these  problems.  And  although  I do  not  purport to  solve  them,  I  do
know  at  least  this:  contemporary  art,  to  the  extent  that  we  care  about  it,  is
distinctly  ill served by the present  moral rights regime.

Let  me  end  with  a  story.  In  2001,  Damien  Hirst,  the  wildly  celebrated
artist  and  winner  of England's  prestigious  Turner  Prize,  exhibited  a  work  of
"trash"  at  a  well-known  London  gallery. 221  The  piece  consisted  of garbage-
coffee  cups,  empty  beer  bottles,  candy  wrappers,  full  ash  trays,  newspapers-
strewn  on  a  gallery  floor.  It  was  valued  at  six  figures. 222  After  Hirst  installed
the  work,  a janitor  arrived  at the  gallery  and  promptly  cleaned  up  by throwing
out the art.  Gallery  staffers  later  salvaged  it from  the  garbage  and meticulously
reconstructed  the  installation  from  photographs  taken  earlier.  Remember  that
Hirst  is  no  marginal  figure.  His  garbage  art  would  surely  be  described  as  a
work  of  "substantial  artistic  merit"  no  matter  how  you  measure  it-critical
acclaim,  prizes,  market  value,  fame,  or  museum  and  gallery  attention.  Is
Damien  Hirst  making  work  that  merits  a  special  right  of  integrity,  that  is
distinct  from  other  kinds  of objects  in  the  world  in  the  way  that  moral  rights
envision?  Did the  janitor  violate  Hirst's  work  in  a  way  that  would be  akin  to
violating  Hirst's child?  Did  he  harm  Hirst's  soul,  his  innermost  being?  Has he
robbed  us  of what  Merryman  describes  as  our  shared public  interest  in  seeing
"the  work  as the  artist  intended  it, undistorted"  in  satisfying  our "yeam[ing]  for
the  authentic, for contact  with the  work in  its true version"? 223

Hirst's work  begs us, or  at least me,  to ask  the question that VARA  cannot
fathom:  who  is  the better  artist in  this story,  Hirst  or  the janitor who  threw  the
art  out?  I  take  the janitor.  He  is  the  true artistic  heir  of Warhol  and  Duchamp
and  Hirst  himself.  And  with  his  gesture,  perhaps  we  should  consign  moral
rights  law  to  the  dustbin  as  well.  It  is  a  relic  of a  moment  when  "art"  meant
something  that is  now long gone.

220.  See  MARC J.  GOTLIEB,  THE  PLIGHT  OF  EMULATION  (1996).
221.  Hirst  was  not  the  first to  display trash  as  art.  Gustav Metzger  did  it in  1960.  Nor was
Hirst  the  first  to  have  his  trash/art  thrown  out-Metzger  achieved  that  too. See  Sam  Jones,  How
Auto-Destructive Art  Work Got Destroyed Too Soon, GUARDIAN,  Aug. 27,  2004.

222.  Gewen, supra note  196.
223.  Merryman,  supra note  5,  at  1041.

