 

 

 

 

 

 

COMPUTER ASSOCIATES INTERNATIONAL, INC., Plaintiff-
Appellant-Cross-Appellee, v. ALTAI, INC., Defendant-Appellee-

Cross-Appellant. 

Docket Nos. 91-7893, 91-7935 

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SECOND 

CIRCUIT 

982 F.2d 693; 1992 U.S. App. LEXIS 33369; 119 A.L.R. Fed. 741; 92 

Cal. Daily Op. Service 10213 

January 9, 1992, Argued   
December 17, 1992, Filed  

 
Before  ALTIMARI,  MAHONEY  and  WALKER,  Circuit  Judges.  Judge  Altimari  concurs  in  part 
and dissents in part in a separate opinion.   
 

WALKER, Circuit Judge:  
In  recent  years,  the  growth  of  computer  science  has  spawned  a  number  of  challenging  legal 
questions, particularly in the field of copyright law. As scientific knowledge advances, courts en-
deavor to keep pace, and sometimes--as in the area of computer technology--they are required to 
venture into less than familiar waters. This is not a new development, though. "From its beginning, 
the law of copyright has developed in response to significant changes in technology." Sony Corp. v. 
Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 430, 78 L. Ed. 2d 574, 104 S. Ct. 774 (1984).  

Article I, section 8 of the Constitution authorizes Congress "to promote the Progress of Science 
and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their 
respective Writings and Discoveries." The Supreme Court has stated that "the economic philosophy 
behind the clause . . . is the conviction that encouragement of individual effort by personal gain is 
the best way to advance public welfare . . . ." Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201, 219, 98 L. Ed. 630, 74 
S. Ct. 460 (1954). The author's benefit, however, is clearly a "secondary" consideration. See United 
States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc., 334 U.S. 131, 158, 92 L. Ed. 1260, 68 S. Ct. 915 (1948). "The 
ultimate aim is, by this incentive, to stimulate artistic creativity for the general public good." Twen-
tieth Century Music Corp. v. Aiken, 422 U.S. 151, 156, 45 L. Ed. 2d 84, 95 S. Ct. 2040 (1975).  

Thus, the copyright law seeks to establish a delicate equilibrium. On the one hand, it affords 
protection to authors as an incentive to create, and, on the other, it must appropriately limit the ex-
tent of that protection so as to avoid the effects of monopolistic stagnation. In applying the federal 
act to new types of cases, courts must always keep this symmetry in mind. Id.  

Among other things, this case deals with the challenging question of whether and to what extent 
the "non-literal" aspects of a computer program, that is, those aspects that are not reduced to written 
code, are protected by copyright. While a few other courts have already grappled with this issue, 
this case is one of first impression in this circuit. As we shall discuss, we find the results reached by 
other courts to be less than satisfactory. Drawing upon long-standing doctrines of copyright law, we 

 

1 

 

take an approach that we think better addresses the practical difficulties embedded in these types of 
cases. In so doing, we have kept in mind the necessary balance between creative incentive and in-
dustrial competition.  

This appeal comes to us from the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New 
York, the Honorable George C. Pratt, Circuit Judge, sitting by designation. By Memorandum and 
Order entered August 12, 1991, Judge Pratt found that defendant Altai, Inc.'s ("Altai"), OSCAR 3.4 
computer program had infringed plaintiff Computer Associates' ("CA"), copyrighted computer pro-
gram entitled  CA-SCHEDULER. Accordingly, the district court awarded CA $ 364,444 in actual 
damages and apportioned profits. Altai has  abandoned its appeal from this award. With respect to 
CA's second claim for copyright infringement, Judge Pratt found that Altai's OSCAR 3.5 program 
was not substantially similar to a portion of CA-SCHEDULER called ADAPTER, and thus denied 
relief. Finally, the district court concluded that CA's state law trade secret misappropriation claim 
against Altai had been preempted by the federal copyright act. CA appealed from these findings.  

Because we are in full agreement with Judge Pratt's decision and in substantial agreement with 
his  careful  reasoning  regarding  CA's  copyright  infringement  claim,  we  affirm  the  district  court's 
judgment on that issue. However, we vacate the district court's preemption ruling with respect to 
CA's trade secret claim, and remand the case to the district court for further proceedings. 

BACKGROUND 

We assume familiarity with the facts set forth in the district court's comprehensive and scholarly 
opinion. See Computer Assocs. Int'l, Inc. v. Altai, Inc., 775 F. Supp. 544, 549-55 (E.D.N.Y. 1991). 
Thus, we summarize only those facts necessary to resolve this appeal.  
 

I. COMPUTER PROGRAM DESIGN 

Certain elementary facts concerning the nature of computer programs are vital to the following 
discussion. The Copyright Act defines a computer program as "a set of statements or instructions to 
be used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a certain result." 17 U.S.C. § 
101. In writing these directions, the programmer works "from the general to the specific." Whelan 
Assoc., Inc. v. Jaslow Dental Lab., Inc., 797 F.2d 1222, 1229 (3d Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 
1031, 93 L. Ed. 2d 831, 107 S. Ct. 877 (1987). See generally Steven R. Englund, Note, Idea, Proc-
ess, or Protected Expression?: Determining the Scope of Copyright Protection of the Structure of 
Computer  Programs,  88  MICH.  L.  REV.  866,  867-73  (1990)  (hereinafter  "Englund");  Peter  S. 
Menell, An Analysis of the Scope of Copyright Protection for Application Programs, 41 STAN. L. 
REV. 1045, 1051-57 (1989) (hereinafter "Menell"); Mark T. Kretschmer, Note, Copyright Protec-
tion For Software Architecture: Just  Say No!, 1988 COLUM. BUS. L. REV. 823, 824-27 (1988) 
(hereinafter  "Kretschmer");  Peter  G.  Spivack,  Comment,  Does  Form  Follow  Function?  The 
Idea/Expression Dichotomy In Copyright Protection of Computer Software, 35 U.C.L.A. L. REV. 
723, 729-31 (1988) (hereinafter "Spivack").  

The first step in this procedure is to identify a program's ultimate function or purpose. An ex-
ample  of  such  an  ultimate  purpose  might  be  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  a  business  ledger. 
Once this goal has been achieved, a programmer breaks down or "decomposes" the program's ulti-
mate  function  into  "simpler  constituent  problems  or  'subtasks,'"  Englund,  at  870,  which  are  also 
known as subroutines or modules. See Spivack, at 729. In the context of a business ledger program, 
a module or subroutine might be responsible for the task of updating a list of outstanding accounts 

 

2 

 

receivable.  Sometimes,  depending  upon  the  complexity  of  its  task,  a  subroutine  may  be  broken 
down further into sub-subroutines.  

Having sufficiently decomposed the program's ultimate function into its component elements, a 
programmer will then arrange the subroutines or modules into what are known as organizational or 
flow charts. Flow charts map the interactions between modules that achieve the program's end goal. 
See Kretschmer, at 826. 

In  order  to  accomplish  these  intra-program  interactions,  a  programmer  must  carefully  design 
each module's parameter list. A parameter list, according to the expert appointed and fully credited 
by the district court, Dr. Randall Davis, is "the information sent to and received from a subroutine." 
See Report of Dr. Randall Davis, at 12. The term "parameter list" refers to the form in which infor-
mation is passed between modules (e.g. for accounts receivable, the designated time frame and par-
ticular customer identifying number) and the information's actual content (e.g.  8/91-7/92; customer 
No. 3). Id. With respect to form, interacting modules must share similar parameter lists so that they 
are capable of exchanging information.  

"The functions of the modules in a program together with each module's relationships to other 
modules constitute the 'structure' of the program." Englund, at 871. Additionally, the term structure 
may include the category of modules referred to as "macros." A macro is a single instruction that 
initiates a sequence of operations or module interactions within the program. Very often the user 
will accompany a macro with an instruction from the parameter list to refine the instruction (e.g. 
current total of accounts receivable (macro), but limited to those for 8/91 to 7/92 from customer No. 
3 (parameters)).  

In  fashioning  the  structure,  a  programmer  will  normally  attempt  to  maximize  the  program's 
speed, efficiency, as well as simplicity for user operation, while taking into consideration certain 
externalities such as the memory constraints of the computer upon which the program will be run. 
See id.; Kretschmer, at 826; Menell, at 1052. "This stage of program design often requires the most 
time and investment." Kretschmer, at 826. 

Once  each  necessary  module  has  been  identified,  designed,  and  its  relationship  to  the  other 
modules has been laid out conceptually, the resulting program structure must be embodied in a writ-
ten language that the computer can read. This process is called "coding," and requires two steps.  
Whelan, 797 F.2d at 1230. First, the programmer must transpose the program's structural blue-print 
into  a  source  code.  This  step  has  been  described  as  "comparable  to  the  novelist  fleshing  out  the 
broad  outline  of  his  plot  by  crafting  from  words  and  sentences  the  paragraphs  that  convey  the 
ideas." Kretschmer, at 826. The source code may be written in any one of several computer lan-
guages, such as COBAL, FORTRAN, BASIC, EDL, etc., depending upon the type of computer for 
which the program is intended.  Whelan, 797 F.2d at 1230. Once the source code has been com-
pleted, the second step is to translate or "compile" it into object code. Object code is the binary lan-
guage comprised of zeros and ones through which the computer directly receives its instructions.  
Id., at 1230-31; Englund, at 868 & n.13.  

After the coding is finished, the programmer will run the program on the computer in order to 
find and correct any logical and syntactical errors. This is known as "debugging" and, once done, 
the program is complete. See Kretschmer, at 826-27. 
 

II. FACTS 

 

3 

 

CA is a Delaware corporation, with its principal place of business in Garden City, New York. 
Altai is a Texas corporation, doing business primarily in Arlington, Texas. Both companies are in 
the  computer  software  industry--designing,  developing  and  marketing  various  types  of  computer 
programs. 

The  subject  of  this  litigation  originates  with  one  of  CA's  marketed  programs  entitled  CA-
SCHEDULER. CA-SCHEDULER is a job scheduling program designed for IBM mainframe com-
puters. Its primary functions are straightforward: to create a schedule specifying when the computer 
should  run  various  tasks,  and  then  to  control  the  computer  as  it  executes  the  schedule.  CA-
SCHEDULER contains a sub-program entitled ADAPTER, also developed by CA. ADAPTER is 
not  an  independently  marketed  product  of  CA;  it  is  a  wholly  integrated  component  of  CA-
SCHEDULER and has no capacity for independent use.  

Nevertheless, ADAPTER plays an extremely important role. It is an "operating system compati-
bility component," which means, roughly speaking, it serves as a translator. An "operating system" 
is itself a program that manages the resources of the computer, allocating those resources to other 
programs as needed. The IBM System 370 family of computers, for which CA-SCHEDULER was 
created, is, depending upon the computer's size, designed to contain one of three operating systems: 
DOS/VSE, MVS, or CMS. As the district court noted, the general rule is that "a  program written 
for one operating system, e.g., DOS/VSE, will not, without modification, run under another operat-
ing system such as MVS." Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 550. ADAPTER's function is to trans-
late the language of a given program into the particular language that the computer's own operating 
system can understand.  

The district court succinctly outlined the manner in which ADAPTER works within the context 
of the larger program. In order to enable CA-SCHEDULER to function on different operating sys-
tems, CA divided the CA-SCHEDULER into two components:  

--a first component that contains only the task-specific portions of the program, independent of 

all operating system issues, and  

--a second component that contains all the interconnections between the first component and the 

operating system.  

In a program constructed in this way, whenever the first, task-specific, component needs to ask 
the operating system for some resource through a "system call", it calls the second component in-
stead of calling the operating system directly.  

The second component serves as an "interface" or "compatibility component" between the task-
specific  portion  of      the  program  and  the  operating  system.  It  receives  the  request  from  the  first 
component and translates it into the appropriate system call that will be recognized by whatever op-
erating system is installed on the computer, e.g., DOS/VSE, MVS, or CMS. Since the first, task-
specific component calls the adapter component rather than the operating system, the first compo-
nent need not be customized to use any specific operating system. The second, interface, component 
insures that all the system calls are performed properly for the particular operating system in use.  
  
Id.  at  551.  ADAPTER  serves  as  the  second,  "common  system  interface"  component  referred  to 
above.  

 

4 

 

A program like ADAPTER, which allows a computer user to change or use multiple operating 
systems while maintaining the same software, is highly desirable. It saves the user the costs, both in 
time and money, that otherwise would be expended in purchasing new programs, modifying exist-
ing systems to run them, and gaining familiarity with their operation. The benefits run both ways. 
The increased compatibility afforded by an ADAPTER-like component, and its resulting popularity 
among consumers, makes whatever software in which it is incorporated significantly more market-
able.  

Starting  in  1982,  Altai  began  marketing  its  own  job  scheduling  program  entitled  ZEKE.  The 
original version of ZEKE was designed for use in conjunction with a VSE operating system. By late 
1983, in response to customer demand, Altai decided to rewrite ZEKE so that it could be run in con-
junction with an MVS operating system.  

At that time, James P. Williams ("Williams"), then an employee of Altai and now its President, 
approached Claude F. Arney, III ("Arney"), a computer programmer who worked for CA. Williams 
and Arney were longstanding friends, and had in fact been co-workers at CA for some time before 
Williams left CA to work for Altai's predecessor. Williams wanted to recruit Arney to assist Altai in 
designing an MVS version of ZEKE.  

At the time he first spoke with Arney, Williams was aware of both the CA-SCHEDULER and 
ADAPTER  programs.  However,  Williams  was  not  involved  in  their  development  and  had  never 
seen the codes of either program. When he asked Arney to come work for Altai, Williams did not 
know that ADAPTER was a component of CA-SCHEDULER.  

Arney, on the other hand, was intimately familiar with various aspects of ADAPTER. While 
working  for  CA,  he  helped  improve  the  VSE  version  of  ADAPTER,  and  was  permitted  to  take 
home a copy of ADAPTER'S source code. This apparently developed into an irresistible habit, for 
when Arney left CA to work for Altai in January, 1984, he took with him copies of  the source code 
for both the VSE and MVS versions of ADAPTER. He did this in knowing violation of the CA em-
ployee agreements that he had signed.  

Once at Altai, Arney and Williams discussed design possibilities for adapting ZEKE to run on 
MVS  operating  systems.  Williams,  who  had  created  the  VSE  version of  ZEKE,  thought  that  ap-
proximately  30%  of  his  original  program  would  have  to  be  modified  in  order  to  accommodate 
MVS. Arney persuaded Williams that the best way to make the needed modifications was to intro-
duce a "common system interface" component into ZEKE. He did not tell Williams that his idea 
stemmed from his familiarity with ADAPTER. They decided to name this new component-program 
OSCAR.  

Arney went to work creating OSCAR at Altai's offices using the ADAPTER source code. The 
district court accepted Williams' testimony that no one at Altai, with the exception of Arney, af-
firmatively  knew  that  Arney  had  the  ADAPTER  code,  or  that  he  was  using  it  to  create  OS-
CAR/VSE. However, during this time period, Williams' office was adjacent to Arney's. Williams 
testified that he and Arney "conversed quite frequently" while Arney was "investigating the source 
code of ZEKE" and that Arney was in his office "a number of times daily, asking questions." In 
three months, Arney successfully completed the OSCAR/VSE project. In an additional month he 
developed an OSCAR/MVS version. When the dust finally settled, Arney had copied approximately 
30% of OSCAR's code from CA's ADAPTER program.  

 

5 

 

The  first  generation  of  OSCAR  programs  was  known  as  OSCAR  3.4.  From  1985  to  August 
1988,  Altai  used  OSCAR  3.4  in  its  ZEKE  product,  as  well  as  in  programs  entitled  ZACK  and 
ZEBB. In late July 1988, CA first learned that Altai may have appropriated parts of ADAPTER. 
After  confirming  its  suspicions,  CA  secured  copyrights  on  its  2.1  and  7.0  versions  of  CA-
SCHEDULER. CA then brought this copyright and trade secret misappropriation action against Al-
tai.  

Apparently, it was upon receipt of the summons and complaint that Altai first learned that Ar-
ney had copied much of the OSCAR code from ADAPTER. After Arney confirmed to Williams 
that CA's accusations of copying were true, Williams immediately set out to survey the damage. 
Without ever looking at the ADAPTER code himself, Williams learned from Arney exactly which 
sections of code Arney had taken from ADAPTER.  

Upon advice of counsel, Williams initiated OSCAR's rewrite. The project's goal was to save as 
much of OSCAR 3.4 as legitimately could be used, and to excise those portions which had been 
copied  from  ADAPTER.  Arney  was  entirely  excluded  from  the  process,  and  his  copy  of  the 
ADAPTER code was locked away. Williams put eight other programmers on the project, none of 
whom had been involved in any way in the development of OSCAR 3.4. Williams provided the 
programmers with a description of the ZEKE operating system services so that they could rewrite 
the appropriate code. The rewrite project took about six months to complete and was finished in 
mid-November 1989. The resulting program was entitled OSCAR 3.5.  

From  that  point  on,  Altai  shipped  only  OSCAR  3.5  to  its  new  customers.  Altai  also  shipped 
OSCAR 3.5 as a "free upgrade" to all customers that had previously purchased OSCAR 3.4. While 
Altai and Williams acted responsibly to  correct Arney's literal copying of the ADAPTER program, 
copyright infringement had occurred.  

After CA originally instituted this action in the United States District Court for the District of 
New Jersey, the parties stipulated its transfer in March, 1989, to the Eastern District of New York 
where it was assigned to Judge Jacob Mishler. On October 26, 1989, Judge Mishler transferred the 
case to Judge Pratt who was sitting in the district court by designation. Judge Pratt conducted a six 
day trial from March 28 through April 6, 1990. He entered judgment on August 12, 1991, and this 
appeal followed.  

DISCUSSION 

While both parties originally appealed from different aspects of the district court's judgment, Al-
tai has now abandoned its appellate claims. In particular, Altai has conceded liability for the copy-
ing of ADAPTER into OSCAR 3.4 and raises no challenge to the award of $ 364,444 in damages 
on that score. Thus, we address only CA's appeal from the district court's rulings that: (1) Altai was 
not liable for copyright infringement in developing OSCAR 3.5; and (2) in developing both OSCAR 
3.4 and 3.5, Altai was not liable for misappropriating CA's trade secrets.  

CA  makes  two  arguments.    First,  CA  contends  that  the  district  court  applied  an  erroneous 
method for determining whether there exists substantial similarity between computer programs, and 
thus, erred in determining that OSCAR 3.5 did not infringe the copyrights held on the different ver-
sions of its CA-SCHEDULER program. CA asserts that the test applied by the district court failed 
to account sufficiently for a computer program's non-literal elements. Second, CA maintains that the 
district court erroneously concluded that its state law trade secret claims had been preempted by the 
federal copyright act, see 17 U.S.C. § 301(a). We shall address each argument in turn. 

 

6 

 

 

I. COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT 

In any suit for copyright infringement, the plaintiff must establish its ownership of a valid copy-
right, and that the defendant copied the copyrighted work. See Novelty Textile Mills, Inc. v. Joan 
Fabrics Corp., 558 F.2d 1090, 1092 (2d Cir. 1977); see also 3 Melville B. Nimmer & David Nim-
mer, Nimmer on Copyright § 13.01, at 13-4 (1991) (hereinafter "Nimmer"). The plaintiff may prove 
defendant's copying either by direct evidence or, as is most often the case, by showing that (1) the 
defendant had access to the plaintiff's copyrighted work and (2) that defendant's work is substan-
tially similar to the plaintiff's copyrightable material. See Walker v. Time Life Films, Inc., 784 F.2d 
44, 48 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 1159, 90 L. Ed. 2d 721, 106 S. Ct. 2278 (1986).  

For the purpose of analysis, the district court assumed that Altai had access to the ADAPTER 
code when creating OSCAR 3.5. See Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 558. Thus, in determining 
whether Altai had unlawfully copied protected aspects of CA's ADAPTER, the district court nar-
rowed its focus of inquiry to ascertaining whether Altai's OSCAR 3.5 was substantially similar to 
ADAPTER.  Because  we  approve  Judge  Pratt's  conclusions  regarding  substantial  similarity,  our 
analysis will proceed along the same assumption.  

As  a  general  matter,  and  to  varying  degrees,  copyright  protection  extends  beyond  a  literary 
work's strictly textual form to its non-literal components. As we have said, "it is of course essential 
to any protection of literary property . . . that the right cannot be limited literally to the text, else a 
plagiarist would escape by immaterial variations." Nichols v. Universal Pictures Co., 45 F.2d 119, 
121 (2d Cir. 1930) (L. Hand, J.), cert. denied, 282 U.S. 902, 75 L. Ed. 795, 51 S. Ct. 216 (1931). 
Thus, where "the fundamental essence or structure of one work is duplicated in another," 3 Nimmer, 
§ 13.03[A][1], at 13-24, courts have found copyright infringement. See, e.g., Horgan v. Macmillan, 
789 F.2d 157, 162 (2d Cir. 1986) (recognizing that a book of photographs might infringe ballet cho-
reography); Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp. v. MCA, Inc., 715 F.2d 1327, 1329 (9th Cir. 1983) 
(motion  picture  and  television  series);  Sid  &  Marty  Krofft  Television  Prods.,  Inc.  v.  McDonald's 
Corp., 562 F.2d 1157, 1167 (9th Cir. 1977) (television commercial and television series); Sheldon v. 
Metro-Goldwyn  Pictures  Corp.,  81  F.2d  49,  55  (2d  Cir.),  cert.  denied,  298  U.S.  669,  80  L.  Ed. 
1392, 56 S. Ct. 835 (1936) (play and motion picture); accord Stewart v. Abend, 495 U.S. 207, 238, 
109 L. Ed. 2d 184, 110 S. Ct. 1750 (1990) (recognizing that motion  picture may infringe copyright 
in book by using its "unique setting, characters, plot, and sequence of events"). This black letter 
proposition is the springboard for our discussion.  

  A. Copyright Protection for the Non-literal Elements of Computer Programs  
It is now well settled that the literal elements of computer programs, i.e., their source and object 
codes,  are  the  subject  of  copyright  protection.  See  Whelan,  797  F.2d  at  1233  (source  and  object 
code); CMS Software Design Sys., Inc. v. Info Designs, Inc., 785 F.2d 1246, 1247 (5th Cir. 1986) 
(source  code);  Apple  Computer,  Inc.  v.  Franklin  Computer  Corp.,  714  F.2d  1240,  1249  (3d  Cir. 
1983), cert. dismissed, 464 U.S. 1033, 104 S. Ct. 690, 79 L. Ed. 2d 158 (1984) (source and object 
code); Williams Electronics, Inc. v. Artic Int'l, Inc., 685 F.2d 870, 876-77 (3d Cir. 1982) (object 
code).  Here,  as  noted  earlier,  Altai  admits  having  copied  approximately  30%  of  the  OSCAR  3.4 
program from CA's ADAPTER source code, and does not challenge the district court's related find-
ing of infringement.  

 

7 

 

In this case, the hotly  contested issues surround OSCAR 3.5. As recounted above, OSCAR 3.5 
is the product of Altai's carefully orchestrated rewrite of OSCAR 3.4. After the purge, none of the 
ADAPTER source code remained in the 3.5 version; thus, Altai made sure that the literal elements 
of  its  revamped  OSCAR  program  were  no  longer  substantially  similar  to  the  literal  elements  of 
CA's ADAPTER.  

According to CA, the district court erroneously concluded that Altai's OSCAR 3.5 was not sub-
stantially similar to its own ADAPTER program. CA argues that this occurred because the district 
court "committed legal error in analyzing [its] claims of copyright infringement by failing to find 
that copyright protects expression contained in the non-literal elements of computer software." We 
disagree.  

CA argues that, despite Altai's rewrite of the OSCAR code, the resulting program remained sub-
stantially similar to the structure of its ADAPTER program. As discussed above, a program's struc-
ture includes its nonliteral components such as general flow charts as well as the more specific or-
ganization of inter-modular relationships, parameter lists, and macros. In addition to these aspects, 
CA contends that OSCAR 3.5 is also substantially similar to ADAPTER with respect to the list of 
services that both ADAPTER and OSCAR obtain from their respective operating systems. We must 
decide whether and to what extent these elements of computer programs are protected by copyright 
law.  

The statutory terrain in this area has been well explored. See Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Paperback 
Software  Int'l,  740  F.  Supp.  37,  47-51  (D.  Mass.  1990);  see  also  Whelan,  797  F.2d  at  1240-42; 
Englund, at 885-90; Spivack, at 731-37. The Copyright Act affords protection to "original works of 
authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression . . . ." 17 U.S.C. § 102(a). This broad cate-
gory of protected "works" includes "literary works," id. at § 102(a)(1), which are defined by the Act 
as  
  
works,  other  than  audiovisual  works,  expressed  in  words,  numbers,  or  other  verbal  or  numerical 
symbols  or  indicia,  regardless  of  the  nature  of  the  material  objects,  such  as  books,  periodicals, 
manuscripts, phonorecords, film tapes, disks, or cards, in which they are embodied.  
  
17 U.S.C. § 101. While computer programs are not specifically listed as part of the above statutory 
definition, the legislative history leaves no doubt that Congress intended them to be considered lit-
erary  works.  See  H.R.Rep.  No.  1476,  94th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.  54,  reprinted  in  1976  U.S.C.C.A.N. 
5659, 5667 (hereinafter "House Report"); Whelan, 797 F.2d at 1234; Apple Computer, 714 F.2d at 
1247.  

The  syllogism  that  follows  from  the  foregoing  premises  is  a  powerful  one:  if  the  non-literal 
structures of literary works are protected by copyright; and if computer programs are literary works, 
as we are told by the legislature; then the non-literal structures of computer programs are protected 
by copyright. See Whelan, 797 F.2d at 1234 ("By analogy to other literary works, it would thus ap-
pear that the copyrights of computer programs can be infringed even absent copying of the literal 
elements  of  the  program.").  We  have  no  reservation  in  joining  the  company  of  those  courts  that 
have already ascribed to this logic. See, e.g., Johnson Controls, Inc. v. Phoenix Control Sys., Inc., 
886 F.2d 1173, 1175 (9th Cir. 1989); Lotus Dev. Corp., 740 F. Supp. at 54; Digital Communications 
Assocs., Inc. v. Softklone Distrib. Corp., 659 F. Supp. 449, 455-56 (N.D.Ga. 1987); Q-Co Indus., 
Inc. v. Hoffman, 625 F. Supp. 608, 615 (S.D.N.Y. 1985); SAS Inst., Inc. v. S & H Computer Sys., 

 

8 

 

Inc.,  605  F.  Supp.  816,  829-30  (M.D.Tenn.  1985).  However,  that  conclusion  does  not  end  our 
analysis. We must determine the scope of copyright protection that extends to a computer program's 
non-literal structure.  

As  a  caveat,  we  note  that  our  decision  here  does  not  control  infringement  actions  regarding 
categorically distinct works, such as certain types of screen displays. These items represent products 
of computer programs, rather than the programs themselves, and fall under the copyright rubric of 
audiovisual  works.  If  a  computer  audiovisual  display  is  copyrighted  separately  as  an  audiovisual 
work, apart from the literary work that generates it (i.e., the program), the display may be protect-
able regardless of the underlying program's copyright status. See Stern Elecs., Inc. v. Kaufman, 669 
F.2d 852, 855 (2d Cir. 1982) (explaining that an audiovisual works copyright, rather than a copy-
right on the underlying program, extended greater protection to the sights and sounds generated by a 
computer video game because the same audiovisual display could be generated by different pro-
grams). Of course, the copyright protection that these displays enjoy extends only so far as their ex-
pression is protectable. See Data East USA, Inc. v. Epyx, Inc., 862 F.2d 204, 209 (9th Cir. 1988). In 
this case, however, we are concerned not with a program's display, but the program itself, and then 
with only its non-literal components. In considering the copyrightability of these components, we 
must refer to venerable doctrines of copyright law.  

1) Idea vs. Expression Dichotomy  
It is a fundamental principle of copyright law that a copyright does not protect an idea, but only 
the expression of the idea. See Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99, 25 L. Ed. 841 (1879); Mazer v. Stein, 
347 U.S. 201, 217, 98 L. Ed. 630, 74 S. Ct. 460 (1954). This axiom of common law has been incor-
porated into the governing statute. Section 102(b) of the Act provides:  
  
In  no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship extend to any idea, proce-
dure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery, regardless of the form 
in which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.  
  
17 U.S.C. § 102(b). See also House Report, at 5670 ("Copyright does not preclude others from us-
ing ideas or information revealed by the author's work.").  

Congress made no special exception for computer programs. To the contrary, the legislative his-
tory explicitly states that copyright protects computer programs only "to the extent that they incor-
porate  authorship  in  programmer's  expression  of  original  ideas,  as  distinguished  from  the  ideas 
themselves." Id. at 5667; see also id. at 5670 ("Section 102(b) is intended . . . to make clear that the 
expression  adopted  by  the  programmer  is  the  copyrightable  element  in  a  computer  program,  and 
that the actual processes or methods embodied in the program are not within the scope of copyright 
law.").  

Similarly,  the  National  Commission  on  New  Technological  Uses  of  Copyrighted  Works 
("CONTU") established by Congress to survey the issues generated by the interrelationship of ad-
vancing technology and copyright law, see Pub.L. No. 93-573, § 201, 88 Stat. 1873 (1974), recom-
mended, inter alia, that the 1976 Copyright Act "be amended . . . to make it explicit that computer 
programs, to the extent that they embody the author's original creation, are proper subject matter for 
copyright."  See  National  Commission  on  New  Technological  Uses  of  Copyrighted  Works,  Final 
Report 1 (1979) (hereinafter "CONTU Report"). To that end, Congress adopted CONTU's sugges-
tions and amended the Copyright Act by adding, among other things, a provision to 17 U.S.C. § 101 

 

9 

 

which defined the term "computer program." See Pub.L. No. 96-517, § 10(a), 94 Stat.  3028 (1980). 
CONTU  also  "concluded  that  the  idea-expression  distinction  should  be  used  to  determine  which 
aspects  of  computer  programs  are  copyrightable."  Lotus  Dev.  Corp.,  740  F.  Supp.  at  54  (citing 
CONTU Report, at 44).  

Drawing the line between idea and expression is a tricky business. Judge Learned Hand noted 
that "nobody has ever been able to fix that boundary,  and nobody ever can." Nichols, 45 F.2d at 
121. Thirty years later his convictions remained firm. "Obviously, no principle can be stated as to 
when  an  imitator  has  gone  beyond  copying  the  'idea,'  and  has  borrowed  its  'expression,'"  Judge 
Hand concluded. "Decisions must therefore inevitably be ad hoc." Peter Pan Fabrics, Inc. v. Martin 
Weiner Corp., 274 F.2d 487, 489 (2d Cir. 1960). 

The essentially utilitarian nature of a computer program further complicates the task of distilling 
its idea from its expression. See SAS Inst., 605 F. Supp. at 829; cf. Englund, at 893. In order to de-
scribe both computational processes and abstract ideas, its content "combines creative and technical 
expression." See Spivack, at 755. The variations of expression found in purely creative composi-
tions, as opposed to those contained in utilitarian works, are not directed towards practical applica-
tion. For example, a narration of Humpty Dumpty's demise, which would clearly be a creative com-
position, does not serve the same ends as, say, a recipe for scrambled eggs--which is a more process 
oriented text. Thus, compared to aesthetic works, computer programs hover even more closely to 
the elusive boundary line described in § 102(b).  

The doctrinal starting point in analyses of utilitarian works, is the seminal case of Baker v. Sel-
den, 101 U.S. 99, 25 L. Ed. 841 (1879). In Baker, the Supreme Court faced the question of "whether 
the exclusive property in a system of bookkeeping can be claimed, under the law of copyright, by 
means of a book in which that system is explained?" Id. at 101. Selden had copyrighted a book that 
expounded  a  particular  method  of  bookkeeping.  The  book  contained  lined  pages  with  headings 
intended to illustrate the manner in which the system operated. Baker's accounting publication in-
cluded ledger sheets that employed "substantially the same ruled lines and headings. . . ." Id. Sel-
den's testator sued Baker for copyright infringement on the theory that the ledger sheets were pro-
tected by Selden's copyright.  

The Supreme Court found nothing copyrightable in Selden's bookkeeping system, and rejected 

his infringement claim regarding the ledger sheets. The Court held that:  

The fact that the art described in the book by illustrations of lines and figures which are repro-
duced in practice in the application of the art, makes no difference. Those illustrations are the mere 
language employed by the author to convey his ideas more clearly. Had he used words of descrip-
tion instead of diagrams (which merely stand in the place of words), there could not be the slightest 
doubt  that  others,  applying  the  art  to  practical  use,  might  lawfully  draw  the  lines  and  diagrams 
which were in the author's mind, and which he thus described by words in his book.  

The copyright of a work on mathematical science cannot give to the author an exclusive right to 
the  methods  of  operation  which  he  propounds,  or  to  the  diagrams  which  he  employs  to  explain 
them, so as to prevent an engineer from using them whenever occasion requires.  
  
Id. at 103.  

To the extent that an accounting text and a computer program are both "a set of statements or in-
structions . . . to bring about a certain result," 17 U.S.C. § 101, they are roughly analogous. In the 

 

10 

 

former case, the processes are ultimately conducted by human agency; in the latter, by electronic 
means.  In either case, as already stated, the processes themselves are not protectable. But the hold-
ing in Baker goes farther. The Court concluded that those aspects of a work, which "must necessar-
ily be used as incident to" the idea, system or process that the work describes, are also not copy-
rightable.  101 U.S. at 104. Selden's ledger sheets, therefore, enjoyed  no copyright protection be-
cause they were "necessary incidents to" the system of accounting that he described.  Id. at 103. 
From this reasoning, we conclude that those elements of a computer program that are necessarily 
incidental to its function are similarly unprotectable.  

While Baker v. Selden provides a sound analytical foundation, it offers scant guidance on how 
to separate idea or process from expression, and moreover, on how to further distinguish protectable 
expression from that expression which "must necessarily be used as incident to" the work's underly-
ing concept. In the context of computer programs, the Third Circuit's noted decision in Whelan has, 
thus far, been the most thoughtful attempt to accomplish these ends.  

The court in Whelan faced substantially the same problem as is presented by this case. There, 
the defendant was accused of making off with the non-literal structure of the plaintiff's copyrighted 
dental lab management program, and employing it to create its own competitive version. In assess-
ing whether there had been an infringement, the court had to determine which aspects of the pro-
grams involved were ideas, and which were expression. In separating the two, the court settled upon 
the following conceptual approach:  
  
The line between idea and expression may be drawn with reference to the end sought to be achieved 
by the work in question. In other words, the purpose or function of a utilitarian work would be the 
work's idea, and everything that is not necessary to that purpose or function would be part of the 
expression of the idea. . . . Where there are various means of achieving the desired purpose, then the 
particular means chosen is not necessary to the purpose; hence, there is expression, not idea.  
  
797 F.2d at 1236 (citations omitted). The "idea" of the program at issue in Whelan was identified by 
the court as simply "the efficient management of a dental laboratory." Id. at  n.28.  

So  far,  in  the  courts,  the  Whelan  rule  has  received  a  mixed  reception.  While  some  decisions 
have adopted its reasoning, see, e.g., Bull HN Info. Sys., Inc. v. American Express Bank, Ltd., 1990 
Copyright Law Dec. (CCH) P 26,555 at 23,278 (S.D.N.Y. 1990); Dynamic Solutions, Inc. v. Plan-
ning & Control, Inc., 1987 Copyright Law Dec. (CCH) P 26,062 at 20,912 (S.D.N.Y. 1987); Brod-
erbund Software Inc. v. Unison World, Inc., 648 F. Supp. 1127, 1133 (N.D.Cal. 1986), others have 
rejected it. See Plains Cotton Co-op v. Goodpasture Computer Serv, Inc., 807 F.2d 1256, 1262 (5th 
Cir.), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 821, 108 S. Ct. 80, 98 L. Ed. 2d 42 (1987); cf.  Synercom Technology, 
Inc. v. University Computing Co., 462 F. Supp. 1003, 1014 (N.D.Tex. 1978) (concluding that order 
and sequence of data on computer input formats was idea not expression).  

Whelan has fared even more poorly in the academic community, where its standard for distin-
guishing  idea  from  expression  has  been  widely  criticized  for  being  conceptually  overbroad.  See, 
e.g., Englund, at 881; Menell, at 1074, 1082; Kretschmer, at 837-39; Spivack, at 747-55; Thomas 
M. Gage, Note, Whelan Associates v. Jaslow Dental Laboratories: Copyright Protection for Com-
puter Software Structure--What's the Purpose?, 1987 WIS. L. REV. 859, 860-61 (1987). The lead-
ing commentator in the field has stated that, "the crucial flaw in [Whelan's] reasoning is that it as-
sumes that only one 'idea,' in copyright law terms, underlies any computer program, and that once a 

 

11 

 

separable idea can be identified, everything else must be expression." 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F], at 13-
62.34. This criticism focuses not upon the program's ultimate purpose but upon the reality of its 
structural design. As we have already noted, a computer program's ultimate function or purpose is 
the composite result of interacting subroutines. Since each subroutine is itself a program, and thus, 
may be said to have its own "idea," Whelan's general formulation that a program's overall purpose 
equates with the program's idea is descriptively inadequate.  

Accordingly,  we  think  that  Judge  Pratt  wisely  declined  to  follow Whelan.  See  Computer  As-
socs., 775 F. Supp. at 558-60. In addition to noting the weakness in the Whelan definition of "pro-
gram-idea," mentioned above, Judge Pratt found that Whelan's synonymous use of the terms "struc-
ture, sequence, and organization," see Whelan, 797 F.2d at 1224 n.1, demonstrated a flawed under-
standing of a computer program's method of operation. See Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 559-
60  (discussing  the  distinction  between  a  program's  "static  structure"  and  "dynamic  structure"). 
Rightly, the district court found Whelan's rationale suspect because it is so closely tied to what can 
now be seen--with the passage of time--as the opinion's somewhat outdated appreciation of com-
puter science.  

2)  Substantial  Similarity  Test  for  Computer  Program  Structure:  Abstraction-Filtration-

Comparison 

We think that Whelan's approach to separating idea from expression in computer programs re-
lies too heavily on metaphysical distinctions and does not place enough emphasis on practical con-
siderations.  Cf.    Apple  Computer,  714  F.2d  at  1253  (rejecting  certain  commercial  constraints  on 
programming as a helpful means of distinguishing idea from expression because they did "not enter 
into the somewhat metaphysical issue of whether particular ideas and expressions have merged"). 
As  the  cases  that  we  shall  discuss  demonstrate,  a  satisfactory  answer  to  this  problem  cannot  be 
reached by resorting, a priori, to philosophical first principals.  

As discussed herein, we think that district courts would be well-advised to undertake a three-
step procedure, based on the abstractions test utilized by the district court, in order to determine 
whether the non-literal elements of two or more computer programs are substantially similar. This 
approach breaks no new ground; rather, it draws on such familiar copyright doctrines as merger, 
scenes a faire, and public domain. In taking this approach, however, we are cognizant that computer 
technology is a dynamic field which can quickly outpace judicial decisionmaking. Thus, in cases 
where the technology in question does not allow for a literal application of the procedure we outline 
below, our opinion should not be read to foreclose the district courts of our circuit from utilizing a 
modified version.  

In ascertaining substantial similarity under this approach, a court would first break down the al-
legedly  infringed  program  into  its  constituent  structural  parts.  Then,  by  examining  each  of  these 
parts for such things as incorporated ideas, expression that is necessarily incidental to those ideas, 
and elements that are taken from the public domain, a court would then be able to sift out all non-
protectable material. Left with a kernel, or possibly kernels, of creative expression after following 
this process of elimination, the court's last step would be to compare this material with the structure 
of an allegedly infringing program. The result of this comparison will determine whether the pro-
tectable elements of the programs at issue are substantially similar so as to warrant a finding of in-
fringement. It will be helpful to elaborate a bit further.  

Step One: Abstraction 

 

12 

 

As  the  district  court  appreciated,  see  Computer  Assocs.,  775  F.  Supp.  at  560,  the  theoretic 
framework for analyzing substantial similarity expounded by Learned Hand in the Nichols case is 
helpful in the present context. In Nichols, we enunciated what has now become known as the "ab-
stractions" test for separating idea from expression:  
  
Upon any work . . . a great number of patterns of increasing generality will fit equally well, as more 
and more of the incident is left out. The last may perhaps be no more than the most general state-
ment of what the [work] is about, and at times might consist only of its title; but there is a point in 
this  series  of  abstractions  where  they  are  no  longer  protected,  since  otherwise  the  [author]  could 
prevent the use of his "ideas," to which, apart from their expression, his property is never extended.  
  
Nichols, 45 F.2d at 121.  

While the abstractions test was originally applied in relation to literary works such as novels and 
plays, it is adaptable to computer programs. In contrast to the Whelan approach, the abstractions test 
"implicitly recognizes that any given work may consist of a mixture of numerous ideas and expres-
sions." 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F] at 13-62.34-63.  

As applied to computer programs, the abstractions test will comprise the first step in the exami-
nation for substantial similarity. Initially, in a manner that resembles reverse engineering on a theo-
retical plane, a court should dissect the allegedly copied program's structure and isolate each level 
of abstraction contained within it. This process begins with the code and ends with an articulation of 
the program's ultimate function. Along the way, it is necessary essentially to retrace and map each 
of the designer's steps--in the opposite order in which they were taken during the program's crea-
tion. See Background: Computer Program Design, supra.  

As an anatomical guide to this procedure, the following description is helpful:  
At the lowest level of abstraction, a computer program may be thought of in its entirety as a set 
of individual instructions organized into a hierarchy of modules. At a higher level of abstraction, the 
instructions  in  the  lowest-level  modules  may  be  replaced  conceptually  by  the  functions  of  those 
modules. At progressively higher levels of abstraction, the functions of higher-level modules con-
ceptually  replace  the  implementations  of  those  modules  in  terms  of  lower-level  modules  and  in-
structions, until finally, one is left with nothing but the ultimate function of the program. . . . A pro-
gram has structure at every level of abstraction at which it is viewed. At low levels of abstraction, a 
program's structure may be quite complex; at the highest level it is trivial.  

Englund, at 897-98. Cf. Spivack, at 774.  
Step Two: Filtration 
Once the program's abstraction levels have been discovered, the substantial similarity inquiry 
moves from the conceptual to the concrete. Professor Nimmer suggests, and we endorse, a "succes-
sive filtering method" for separating protectable expression from non-protectable material. See gen-
erally 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F]. This process entails examining the structural components at each level 
of abstraction to determine whether their particular inclusion at that level was "idea" or was dictated 
by considerations of efficiency, so as to be necessarily incidental to that idea; required by factors 
external to the program itself; or taken from the public domain and hence is nonprotectable expres-
sion. See also Kretschmer, at 844-45 (arguing that program features dictated by market externalities 

 

13 

 

or efficiency concerns are unprotectable). The structure of any given program may reflect some, all, 
or none of these considerations. Each case requires its own fact specific investigation.  

Strictly  speaking,  this  filtration  serves  "the  purpose  of  defining  the  scope  of  plaintiff's  copy-
right." Brown Bag Software v. Symantec Corp., 960 F.2d 1465, 1475 (9th Cir.) (endorsing "analytic 
dissection" of computer programs in order to isolate protectable expression), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 
198, 121 L. Ed. 2d 141 (1992). By applying well developed doctrines of copyright law, it may ulti-
mately leave behind a "core of protectable material." 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F][5], at 13-72. Further ex-
plication of this second step may be helpful.  

(a) Elements Dictated by Efficiency 
The portion of Baker v. Selden, discussed earlier, which denies copyright protection to expres-
sion necessarily incidental to the idea being expressed, appears to be the cornerstone for what has 
developed into the doctrine of merger. See Morrissey v. Procter & Gamble Co., 379 F.2d 675, 678-
79 (1st Cir. 1967) (relying on Baker for the proposition that expression embodying the rules of a 
sweepstakes contest was inseparable from the idea of the contest itself, and therefore were not pro-
tectable by copyright); see also Digital Communications, 659 F. Supp. at 457. The doctrine's under-
lying principle is that "when there is essentially only one way to express an idea, the idea and its 
expression are inseparable and copyright is no bar to copying that expression." Concrete Machinery 
Co. v. Classic Lawn Ornaments, Inc., 843 F.2d 600, 606 (1st Cir. 1988). Under these circumstances, 
the expression is said to have "merged" with the idea itself. In order not to confer a monopoly of the 
idea  upon  the  copyright  owner,  such  expression  should  not  be  protected.  See  Herbert  Rosenthal 
Jewelry Corp. v. Kalpakian, 446 F.2d 738, 742 (9th Cir. 1971).  

CONTU recognized the applicability of the merger doctrine to computer programs. In its report 

to Congress it stated that:  

Copyrighted language may be copied without infringing when there is but a limited number of 
ways to express a given idea. . . . In the computer context, this means that when specific instruc-
tions,  even  though  previously  copyrighted,  are  the  only  and  essential  means  of  accomplishing  a 
given task, their later use by another will not amount to infringement.  

CONTU Report at 20. While this statement directly concerns only the application of merger to 
program code, that is, the textual aspect of the program, it reasonably suggests that the doctrine fits 
comfortably within the general context of computer programs.  

Furthermore, when one considers the fact that programmers generally strive to create programs 
"that meet the user's needs in the most efficient manner," Menell, at 1052, the applicability of the 
merger doctrine to computer programs becomes compelling. In the context of computer program 
design, the concept of efficiency is akin to deriving the most concise logical proof or formulating 
the  most  succinct  mathematical  computation.  Thus,  the  more  efficient  a  set  of  modules  are,  the 
more closely they approximate the idea or process embodied in that particular aspect of the pro-
gram's structure.  

While, hypothetically, there might be a myriad of ways in which a programmer may effectuate 
certain  functions  within  a  program,--i.e.,  express  the  idea  embodied  in  a  given  subroutine--
efficiency concerns may so narrow the practical range of choice as to make only one or two forms 
of expression workable options. See 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F][2], at 13-63; see also Whelan, 797 F.2d 
at 1243 n.43 ("It is true that for certain tasks there are only a very limited number of file structures 

 

14 

 

available, and in such cases the structures  might not be copyrightable . . . ."). Of course, not all 
program structure is informed by efficiency concerns. See Menell, at 1052 (besides efficiency, sim-
plicity related to user accommodation has become a programming priority). It follows that in order 
to determine whether the merger doctrine precludes copyright protection to an aspect of a program's 
structure that is so oriented, a court must inquire "whether the use of this particular set of modules 
is  necessary  efficiently  to  implement  that  part  of  the  program's  process"  being  implemented. 
Englund, at 902. If the answer is yes, then the expression represented by the programmer's choice of 
a specific module or group of modules has merged with their underlying idea and is unprotected. Id. 
at 902-03.  

Another justification for linking structural economy with the application of the merger doctrine 
stems  from  a  program's  essentially  utilitarian  nature  and  the  competitive  forces  that  exist  in  the 
software marketplace. See Kretschmer, at 842. Working in tandem, these factors give rise to a prob-
lem of proof which merger helps to eliminate.  

Efficiency is an industry-wide goal. Since, as we have already noted, there may be only a lim-
ited number of efficient implementations for any given program task, it is quite possible that multi-
ple programmers, working independently, will design the identical method employed in the alleg-
edly  infringed  work.  Of  course,  if  this  is  the  case,  there  is  no  copyright  infringement.  See  Roth 
Greeting Cards v. United Card Co., 429 F.2d 1106, 1110 (9th Cir. 1970); Sheldon, 81 F.2d at 54.  

Under these circumstances, the fact that two programs contain the same efficient structure may 
as likely lead to an inference of independent creation as it does to one of copying. See 3 Nimmer § 
13.03[F][2], at 13-65; cf. Herbert Rosenthal Jewelry Corp., 446 F.2d at 741 (evidence of independ-
ent creation may stem from defendant's standing as a designer of previous similar works). Thus, 
since evidence of similarly efficient structure is not particularly probative of copying, it should be 
disregarded in the overall substantial similarity analysis. See 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F][2], at 13-65.  

We find support for applying the merger doctrine in cases that have already addressed the ques-
tion of substantial similarity in the context of computer program structure. Most recently, in Lotus 
Dev. Corp., 740 F. Supp. at 66, the district court had before it a claim of copyright infringement re-
lating  to  the  structure  of  a  computer  spreadsheet  program.  The  court  observed  that  "the  basic 
spreadsheet screen display that resembles a rotated 'L'. . ., if not present in every expression of such 
a program, is present in most expressions." Id. Similarly, the court found that "an essential detail 
present in most if not all expressions of an electronic spreadsheet--is the designation of a particular 
key that, when pressed, will invoke the menu command system." Id. Applying the merger doctrine, 
the court denied copyright protection to both program elements.  

In Manufacturers Technologies, Inc. v. Cams, Inc., 706 F. Supp. 984, 995-99 (D. Conn. 1989), 
the infringement claims stemmed from various alleged program similarities "as indicated in their 
screen displays." Id. at 990. Stressing efficiency concerns in the context of a merger analysis, the 
court determined that the program's method of allowing the  user to navigate within the screen dis-
plays was not protectable because, in part, "the process or manner of navigating internally on any 
specific screen displays . . . is limited in the number of ways it may be simply achieved to facilitate 
user comfort." Id. at 995.  

The court also found that expression contained in various screen displays (in the form of alpha-
betical and numerical columns), was not the proper subject of copyright protection because it was 
"necessarily incident to the ideas" embodied in the displays. Id. at 996-97. Cf.  Digital Communica-

 

15 

 

tions, 659 F. Supp. at 460 (finding no merger and affording copyright protection to program's status 
screen display because "modes of expression chosen . . . are clearly not necessary to the idea of the 
status screen").  

We  agree  with  the  approach  taken  in  these  decisions,  and  conclude  that  application  of  the 
merger doctrine in this setting is an effective way to eliminate non-protectable expression contained 
in computer programs.  

(b) Elements Dictated By External Factors 
We have stated that where "it is virtually impossible to write about a particular historical era or 
fictional theme without employing certain 'stock' or standard literary devices," such expression is 
not copyrightable.  Hoehling v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 618 F.2d 972, 979 (2d Cir.), cert. de-
nied, 449 U.S. 841, 66 L. Ed. 2d 49, 101 S. Ct. 121 (1980). For example, the Hoehling case was an 
infringement suit stemming from several works on the Hindenberg disaster. There we concluded 
that similarities in representations of German beer halls, scenes depicting German greetings such as 
"Heil Hitler," or the singing of certain German songs would not lead to a finding of infringement 
because they were "'indispensable, or at least standard, in the treatment of'" life in Nazi Germany. 
Id. (quoting Alexander v. Haley, 460 F. Supp. 40, 45 (S.D.N.Y. 1978)). This is known as the scenes 
a faire doctrine, and like "merger," it has its analogous application to computer programs. Cf.  Data 
East USA, 862 F.2d at 208 (applying scenes a faire to a home computer video game).  

Professor Nimmer points out that "in many instances it is virtually impossible to write a pro-
gram to perform particular functions in a specific computing environment without employing stan-
dard techniques." 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F][3], at 13-65. This is a result of the fact that a programmer's 
freedom  of  design  choice  is  often  circumscribed  by  extrinsic  considerations  such  as  (1)  the  me-
chanical specifications of the computer on which a particular program  [*710]  is intended to run; 
(2) compatibility requirements of other programs with which a program is designed to operate in 
conjunction; (3) computer manufacturers' design standards; (4) demands of the industry being serv-
iced; and (5) widely accepted programming practices within the computer industry. Id. at 13-66-71.  
Courts have already considered some of these factors in denying copyright protection to various 
elements of computer programs. In the Plains Cotton case, the Fifth Circuit refused to reverse the 
district court's denial of a preliminary injunction against an alleged program infringer because, in 
part, "many of the similarities between the . . . programs [were] dictated by the externalities of the 
cotton market." 807 F.2d at 1262.  

In  Manufacturers  Technologies,  the  district  court  noted  that  the  program's  method  of  screen 
navigation "is influenced by the type of hardware that the software is designed to be used on." 706 
F.  Supp.  at  995.  Because,  in  part,  "the  functioning  of  the  hardware  package  impacted  and  con-
strained the type of navigational tools used in plaintiff's screen displays," the court denied copyright 
protection to that aspect of the program. Cf.  Data East USA, 862 F.2d at 209 (reversing a district 
court's finding of audiovisual work infringement because, inter alia, "the use of the Commodore 
computer for a karate game intended for home consumption is subject to various constraints inher-
ent in the use of that computer").  

Finally, the district court in Q-Co Industries rested its holding on what, perhaps, most closely 
approximates a traditional scenes a faire rationale. There, the court denied copyright protection to 
four  program  modules  employed  in  a  teleprompter  program.  This  decision  was  ultimately  based 

 

16 

 

upon the court's finding that "the same modules would be an inherent part of any prompting pro-
gram." 625 F. Supp. at 616.  

Building upon this existing case law, we conclude that a court must also examine the structural 
content of an allegedly infringed program for elements that might have been dictated by external 
factors.  

(c) Elements taken From the Public Domain 
Closely related to the non-protectability of scenes a faire, is material found in the public do-
main. Such material is free for the taking and cannot be appropriated by a single author even though 
it  is  included  in  a  copyrighted  work.  See  E.F.  Johnson  Co.  v.  Uniden  Corp.  of  America,  623  F. 
Supp. 1485, 1499 (D. Minn. 1985); see also Sheldon, 81 F.2d at 54. We see no reason to make an 
exception to this rule for elements of a computer program that have entered the public domain by 
virtue of freely accessible program exchanges and the like. See 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F][4]; see also 
Brown Bag Software, 960 F.2d at 1473 (affirming the district court's finding that "'plaintiffs may not 
claim copyright protection of an . . . expression that is, if not standard, then commonplace in the 
computer software industry.'"). Thus, a court must also filter out this material from the allegedly 
infringed program before it makes the final inquiry in its substantial similarity analysis. 

Step Three: Comparison  
The third and final step of the test for substantial similarity that we believe appropriate for non-
literal program components entails a comparison. Once a court has sifted out all elements of the al-
legedly  infringed  program  which  are  "ideas"  or  are  dictated  by  efficiency  or  external  factors,  or 
taken  from  the  public  domain,  there  may  remain  a  core  of  protectable  expression.  In  terms  of  a 
work's copyright value, this is the golden nugget. See Brown Bag Software, 960 F.2d at 1475. At 
this point, the court's substantial similarity inquiry focuses on whether the defendant copied any as-
pect of this protected expression, as well as an assessment of the copied portion's relative impor-
tance with respect to the plaintiff's overall program. See 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F][5]; Data East USA, 
862 F.2d at 208 ("To determine whether similarities result from unprotectable expression, analytic 
dissection of similarities may be performed. If . . . all similarities in expression arise from use of 
common ideas, then no substantial similarity can be found.").  

3) Policy Considerations  
We are satisfied that the three step approach we have just outlined not only comports with, but 
advances the constitutional policies underlying the Copyright Act. Since any method that tries to 
distinguish idea from expression ultimately impacts on the scope of copyright protection afforded to 
a particular type of work, "the line [it draws] must be a pragmatic one, which also keeps in consid-
eration 'the preservation of the balance between competition and protection. . . .'" Apple Computer, 
714 F.2d at 1253 (citation omitted).  

CA and some amici argue against the type of approach that we have set forth on the grounds 
that  it  will  be  a  disincentive  for  future  computer  program  research  and  development.  At  bottom, 
they claim that if programmers are not guaranteed broad copyright protection for their work, they 
will not invest the extensive time, energy and funds required to design and improve program struc-
tures. While they have a point, their argument cannot carry the day. The interest of the copyright 
law is not in simply conferring a monopoly on industrious persons, but in advancing the public wel-

 

17 

 

fare through rewarding artistic creativity, in a manner that permits the free use and development of 
non-protectable ideas and processes.  

In this respect, our conclusion is informed by Justice Stewart's concise discussion of the princi-
ples that correctly govern the adaptation of the copyright law to new circumstances. In Twentieth 
Century Music Corp. v. Aiken, he wrote:  

The limited scope of the copyright holder's statutory monopoly, like the limited copyright dura-
tion required by the Constitution, reflects a balance of competing claims upon the public interest: 
Creative work is to be encouraged and rewarded, but private motivation must ultimately serve the 
cause of promoting broad public availability of literature, music, and the other arts.  

The immediate effect of our copyright law is to secure a fair return for an "author's" creative la-
bor. But the ultimate aim is, by this incentive, to stimulate artistic creativity for the general public 
good. . . . When technological change has rendered its literal terms ambiguous, the Copyright Act 
must be construed in light of this basic purpose.  
  
422 U.S. 151, 156, 95 S. Ct. 2040, 45 L. Ed. 2d 84 (1975) (citations and footnotes omitted).  

  Recently, the Supreme Court has emphatically reiterated that "the primary objective of copy-
right is not to reward the labor of authors. . . ." Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 113 
L. Ed. 2d 358, 111 S. Ct. 1282, 1290 (1991) (emphasis added). While the Feist decision deals pri-
marily with the copyrightability of purely factual compilations, its underlying tenets apply to much 
of the work involved in computer programming. Feist put to rest the "sweat of the brow" doctrine in 
copyright law. Id. at 1295. The rationale of that doctrine "was that copyright was a reward for the 
hard work that went into compiling facts." Id. at 1291. The Court flatly rejected this justification for 
extending copyright protection, noting that it "eschewed the most fundamental axiom of copyright 
law--that no one may copyright facts or ideas." Id. 

Feist  teaches  that  substantial  effort  alone  cannot  confer  copyright  status  on  an  otherwise  un-
copyrightable work. As we have discussed, despite the fact that significant labor and expense often 
goes into computer program flow-charting and debugging, that process does not always result in 
inherently protectable expression. Thus, Feist implicitly undercuts the Whelan rationale, "which al-
lowed copyright protection beyond the literal computer code . . . [in order to] provide the proper 
incentive for programmers by protecting their most valuable efforts. . . ." Whelan, 797 F.2d at 1237 
(footnote omitted). We note that Whelan was decided prior to Feist when the "sweat of the brow" 
doctrine still had vitality. In view of the Supreme Court's recent holding, however, we must reject 
the legal basis of CA's disincentive argument.  

Furthermore,  we  are  unpersuaded  that  the  test  we  approve  today  will  lead  to  the  dire  conse-
quences for the computer program industry that plaintiff and some amici predict. To the contrary, 
serious students of the industry have been highly critical of the sweeping scope of copyright protec-
tion engendered by the Whelan rule, in that it "enables first comers to 'lock up' basic programming 
techniques  as  implemented  in  programs  to  perform  particular  tasks."  Menell,  at  1087;  see  also 
Spivack,  at  765  (Whelan  "results  in  an  inhibition  of  creation  by  virtue  of  the  copyright    owner's 
quasi-monopoly power").  

To be frank, the exact contours of copyright protection for non-literal program structure are not 
completely clear. We trust that as future cases are decided, those limits will become better defined. 
Indeed, it may well be that the Copyright Act serves as a relatively weak barrier against public ac-

 

18 

 

cess to the theoretical interstices behind a program's source and object codes. This results from the 
hybrid nature of a computer program, which, while it is literary expression, is also a highly func-
tional, utilitarian component in the larger process of computing.  

Generally, we think that copyright registration--with its indiscriminating availability--is not ide-
ally suited to deal with the highly dynamic technology of computer science. Thus far, many of the 
decisions in this area reflect the courts' attempt to fit the proverbial square peg in a round hole. The 
district court, see Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 560, and at least one commentator have sug-
gested that patent registration, with its exacting up-front novelty and non-obviousness requirements, 
might be the more appropriate rubric of protection for intellectual property of this kind. See Randell 
M. Whitmeyer, Comment, A Plea for Due Processes: Defining the Proper Scope of Patent Protec-
tion for Computer Software, 85 NW. U. L. REV. 1103, 1123-25 (1991); see also Lotus Dev. Corp. 
v. Borland Int'l, Inc., 788 F. Supp. 78, 91 (D. Mass. 1992) (discussing the potentially supplemental 
relationship between patent and copyright protection in the context of computer programs). In any 
event, now that more than 12 years have passed since CONTU issued its final report, the resolution 
of this specific issue could benefit from further legislative investigation--perhaps a CONTU II.  

In the meantime, Congress has made clear that computer programs are literary works entitled to 
copyright protection. Of course, we shall abide by these instructions, but in so doing we must not 
impair the overall integrity of copyright law. While incentive based arguments in favor of broad 
copyright protection are perhaps attractive from a pure policy perspective, see Lotus Dev. Corp., 
740 F. Supp. at 58, ultimately, they have a corrosive effect on certain fundamental tenets of copy-
right doctrine.   If the test we have outlined results in narrowing the scope of protection, as we ex-
pect it will, that result flows from applying, in accordance with Congressional intent, long-standing 
principles of copyright law to computer programs. Of course, our decision is also informed by our 
concern that these fundamental principles remain undistorted.  

B. The District Court Decision 
We turn now to our review of the district court's decision in this particular case. At the outset, 
we  must  address  CA's  claim  that  the  district  court  erred  by  relying  too  heavily  on  the  court  ap-
pointed expert's "personal opinions on the factual and legal issues before the court."  

1) Use of Expert Evidence in Determining Substantial Similarity Between Computer Programs  
Pursuant to Fed.R.Evid. 706, and with the consent of both Altai and CA, Judge Pratt appointed 
and relied upon Dr. Randall Davis of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as the court's own 
expert witness on the issue of substantial similarity. Dr. Davis submitted a comprehensive written 
report that analyzed the various aspects of the computer programs  at issue and evaluated the parties' 
expert evidence. At trial, Dr. Davis was extensively cross-examined by both CA and Altai.  

The well-established general rule in this circuit has been to limit the use of expert opinion in de-
termining whether works at issue are substantially similar. As a threshold matter, expert testimony 
may be used to assist the fact finder in ascertaining whether the defendant had copied any part of 
the plaintiff's work. See Arnstein v. Porter, 154 F.2d 464, 468 (2d Cir. 1946). To this end, "the two 
works are to be compared in their entirety . . . [and] in making such comparison resort may properly 
be made to expert analysis. . . ." 3 Nimmer § 13.03[E][2], at 13-62.16.  

However, once some amount of copying has been established, it remains solely for the trier of 
fact to determine whether the copying was "illicit," that is to say, whether the "defendant took from 

 

19 

 

plaintiff's  works  so  much  of  what  is  pleasing  to  [lay  observers]  who  comprise  the  audience  for 
whom  such  [works  are]  composed,  that  defendant  wrongfully  appropriated  something  which  be-
longs to the plaintiff." Arnstein, 154 F.2d at 473. Since the test for illicit copying is based upon the 
response of ordinary lay observers, expert testimony is thus "irrelevant" and not permitted.  Id. at 
468, 473. We have subsequently described this method of inquiry as "merely an alternative way of 
formulating  the  issue  of  substantial  similarity."  Ideal  Toy  Corp.  v.  Fab-Lu  Ltd.  (Inc.),  360  F.2d 
1021, 1023 n.2 (2d Cir. 1966).  

Historically, Arnstein's ordinary observer standard had its roots in "an attempt to apply the 'rea-
sonable person' doctrine as found in other areas of the law to copyright." 3 Nimmer § 13.03[E][2], 
at 13-62.10-11. That approach may well have served its purpose when the material under scrutiny 
was limited to art forms readily comprehensible and generally familiar to the average lay person. 
However, in considering the extension of the rule to the present case, we are reminded of Holmes' 
admonition that, "the life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience." O. W. Holmes, Jr., 
THE COMMON LAW 1 (1881).  

Thus, in deciding the limits to which expert opinion may be employed in ascertaining the sub-
stantial similarity of computer programs, we cannot disregard the highly complicated and technical 
subject matter at the heart of these claims.  Rather, we recognize the reality that computer programs 
are  likely  to  be  somewhat  impenetrable  by  lay  observers--whether  they  be  judges  or  juries--and, 
thus, seem to fall outside the category of works contemplated by those who engineered the Arnstein 
test.  Cf.  Dawson v. Hinshaw Music Inc., 905 F.2d 731, 737 (4th Cir.) ("departure from the lay 
characterization is warranted only where the intended audience possesses 'specialized expertise'"), 
cert. denied, 112 L. Ed. 2d 523, 111 S. Ct. 511 (1990). As Judge Pratt correctly observed:  

In the context of computer programs, many of the familiar tests of similarity prove to be inade-
quate, for they were developed historically in the context of artistic and literary, rather than utilitar-
ian, works.  
  
Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 558.  

In making its finding on substantial similarity with respect to computer programs, we believe 
that the trier of fact need not be limited by the strictures of its own lay perspective. See Dawson, 
905 F.2d at 735; Whelan, 797 F.2d at 1233; Broderbund, 648 F. Supp. at 1136 (stating in dictum: 
"an integrated test involving expert testimony and analytic dissection may well be the wave of the 
future in this area. . . ."); Brown Bag Software, 960 F.2d at 1478-79 (Sneed, J., concurring); see also 
3 Nimmer § 13.03[E][4]; but see Brown Bag Software, 960 F.2d at 1475 (applying the "ordinary 
reasonable person" standard in substantial similarity test for computer programs). Rather, we leave 
it to the discretion of the district court to decide to what extent, if any, expert opinion, regarding the 
highly technical nature of computer programs, is warranted in a given case.  

In so holding, we do not intend to disturb the traditional role of lay observers in judging  sub-
stantial similarity in copyright cases that involve the aesthetic arts, such as music, visual works or 
literature.  

In this case, Dr. Davis' opinion was instrumental in dismantling the intricacies of computer sci-
ence so that the court could formulate and apply an appropriate rule of law. While Dr. Davis' report 
and testimony undoubtedly shed valuable light on the subject matter of the litigation, Judge Pratt 

 

20 

 

remained, in the final analysis, the trier of fact. The district court's use of the expert's assistance, in 
the context of this case, was entirely appropriate.  

2) Evidentiary Analysis 
The district court had to determine whether Altai's OSCAR 3.5 program was substantially simi-
lar to CA's ADAPTER. We note that Judge Pratt's method of analysis effectively served as a road 
map for our own, with one exception Judge Pratt filtered out the non-copyrightable aspects of OS-
CAR 3.5 rather than those found in ADAPTER, the allegedly infringed program. We think that our 
approach--i.e.,  filtering  out  the  unprotected  aspects  of  an  allegedly  infringed  program  and  then 
comparing the end product to the structure of the suspect program--is preferable, and therefore be-
lieve that district courts should proceed in this manner in future cases  

We opt for this strategy because, in some cases, the defendant's program structure might contain 
protectable expression and/or other elements that are not found in the plaintiff's program. Since it is 
extraneous to the allegedly copied work, this material would have no bearing on any potential sub-
stantial similarity between the two programs. Thus, its filtration would be wasteful  and unnecessar-
ily time consuming. Furthermore, by focusing the analysis on the infringing rather than on the in-
fringed material, a court may mistakenly place too little emphasis on a quantitatively small misap-
propriation which is, in reality, a qualitatively vital aspect of the plaintiff's protectable expression.  
The fact that the district court's analysis proceeded in the reverse order, however, had no mate-
rial impact on the outcome of this case. Since Judge Pratt determined that OSCAR effectively con-
tained no protectable expression whatsoever, the most serious charge that can be levelled against 
him is that he was overly thorough in his examination.  

The district court took the first step in the analysis set forth in this opinion when it separated the 

program by levels of abstraction. The district court stated:  

As applied to computer software programs, this abstractions test would progress in order of "in-
creasing  generality"  from  object  code,  to  source  code,  to  parameter  lists,  to  services  required,  to 
general outline. In discussing the particular similarities, therefore, we shall focus on these levels.  
  
Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 560. While  the facts of a different case might require that a dis-
trict court draw a more particularized blueprint of a program's overall structure, this description is a 
workable one for the case at hand.  

Moving to the district court's evaluation of OSCAR 3.5's structural components, we agree with 
Judge Pratt's systematic exclusion of non-protectable expression. With respect to code, the district 
court observed that after the rewrite of OSCAR 3.4 to OSCAR 3.5, "there remained virtually no 
lines of code that were identical to ADAPTER." Id. at 561. Accordingly, the court found that the 
code "presented no similarity at all." Id. at 562.  

Next, Judge Pratt addressed the issue of similarity between the two programs' parameter lists 
and macros. He concluded that, viewing the conflicting evidence most favorably to CA, it demon-
strated that "only a few of the lists and macros were similar to protected elements in ADAPTER; 
the others were either in the public domain or dictated by the functional demands of the program." 
Id. As discussed above, functional elements and elements taken from the public domain do not qual-
ify for copyright protection.   With respect to the few remaining parameter lists and macros, the dis-
trict court could reasonably conclude that they did not warrant a finding of infringement given their 

 

21 

 

relative contribution to the overall program. See Warner Bros., Inc. v. American Broadcasting Cos., 
Inc., 720 F.2d 231, 242 (2d Cir. 1983) (discussing de minimis exception which allows for literal 
copying  of  a  small  and  usually  insignificant  portion  of  the  plaintiff's  work);  3  Nimmer  § 
13.03[F][5], at 13-74. In any event, the district court reasonably found that, for lack of persuasive 
evidence, CA failed to meet its burden of proof on whether the macros and parameter lists at issue 
were substantially similar. See Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 562.  

The district court also found that the overlap exhibited between the list of services required for 
both ADAPTER and OSCAR 3.5 was "determined by the demands of the operating system and of 
the applications program to which it [was] to be linked through ADAPTER or OSCAR. . . ." Id. In 
other words, this aspect of the program's structure was dictated by the nature of other programs with 
which it was designed to interact and, thus, is not protected by copyright.  

Finally, in his infringement analysis, Judge Pratt accorded no weight to the similarities between 
the two programs' organizational charts, "because [the charts were] so simple and obvious to anyone 
exposed to the operation of the programs." Id. CA argues that the district court's action in this re-
gard "is not consistent with copyright law"--that "obvious" expression is protected, and that the dis-
trict court erroneously failed to realize this. However, to say that elements of a work are "obvious," 
in the manner in which the district court used the word, is to say that they "follow naturally from the 
work's theme rather than from the author's creativity." 3 Nimmer § 13.03[F][3], at 13-65. This is but 
one formulation of the scenes a faire doctrine, which we have already endorsed as a means of weed-
ing out unprotectable expression.  

CA argues, at some length, that many of the district court's factual conclusions regarding the 
creative nature of its program's components are simply wrong. Of course, we are limited in our re-
view of factual findings to setting aside only those that we determine are clearly erroneous.   See 
Fed. R. Civ. P. 52. Upon a thorough review of the voluminous record in this case, which is com-
prised of conflicting testimony and other highly technical evidence, we discern no error on the part 
of Judge Pratt, let alone clear error.  

Since we accept Judge Pratt's factual conclusions and the results of his legal analysis, we affirm 
his dismissal of CA's copyright infringement claim based upon OSCAR 3.5. We emphasize that, 
like all copyright infringement cases, those that involve computer programs are highly fact specific. 
The amount of protection due structural elements, in any given case, will vary according to the pro-
tectable expression found to exist within the program at issue.  
 

II. TRADE SECRET PREEMPTION 

In  its  complaint,  CA  alleged  that  Altai  misappropriated  the  trade  secrets  contained  in  the 
ADAPTER  program.  Prior  to  trial,  while  the  proceedings  were  still  before  Judge  Mishler,  Altai 
moved  to  dismiss  and  for  summary  judgment  on  CA's  trade  secret  misappropriation  claim.  Altai 
argued that section 301 of the Copyright Act preempted CA's state law cause of action. Judge Mish-
ler denied Altai's motion, reasoning that "'the elements of the tort of appropriation of trade secrets 
through the breach of contract or confidence by an employee are not the same as the elements of a 
claim of copyright infringement.'" Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 563.  

The parties addressed the preemption issue again, both in pre-and post-trial briefs. Judge Pratt 
then reconsidered and reversed Judge Mishler's earlier ruling. The district court concluded that CA's 
trade secret claims were preempted because "CA--which is the master of its own case--has pleaded 

 

22 

 

and proven facts which establish that one act constituted both copyright infringement and misap-
propriation of trade secrets [namely, the] copying  of ADAPTER into OSCAR 3.4 . . . ." Computer 
Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 565.  

In our original opinion, Computer Assocs. Int'l, Inc. v. Altai, Inc., 1992 U.S. App. LEXIS 14305 
(2d Cir. 1992), we affirmed Judge Pratt's decision. CA petitioned for rehearing on this issue. In its 
petition for rehearing, CA brought to our attention portions of the record below that were not in-
cluded in the appendix on appeal. CA argued that these documents, along with Judge Mishler's dis-
position of Altai's motion to dismiss and for summary judgment, established that CA advanced non-
preempted trade secret misappropriation claims before both Judge Mishler and Judge Pratt. CA fur-
ther contended that Judge Pratt failed to consider its theory that Altai was liable for wrongful acqui-
sition of CA's trade secrets through Arney. Upon reconsideration, we have granted the petition for 
rehearing,  withdrawn  our  initial  opinion,  and  conclude  in  this  amended  opinion  that  the  district 
court's preemption ruling on CA's trade secret claims should be vacated. We accordingly vacate the 
judgment of the district court on this point and remand CA's trade secret claims for a determination 
on the merits.  

A. General Law of Copyright Preemption Regarding Trade Secrets and Computer Programs  
Congress carefully designed the statutory framework of federal copyright preemption. In order 
to  insure  that  the  enforcement  of  these  rights  remains  solely  within  the  federal  domain,  section 
301(a) of the Copyright Act expressly preempts  

all legal or equitable rights that are equivalent to any of the exclusive rights within the general 
scope of copyright as specified by section 106 in works of authorship that are fixed in a tangible 
medium of expression and come within the subject matter of copyright as specified by sections 102 
and 103 . . . . 

17  U.S.C.  §  301(a).  This  sweeping  displacement  of  state  law  is,  however,  limited  by  section 

301(b), which provides, in relevant part, that  

nothing in this title annuls or limits any rights or remedies under the common law or statutes of 
any State with respect to . . . activities violating legal or equitable rights that are not equivalent to 
any of the exclusive rights within the general scope of copyright as specified by section 106. . . . 

17 U.S.C. § 301(b)(3). Section 106, in turn, affords a copyright owner the exclusive right to: (1) 
reproduce the copyrighted work; (2) prepare derivative works; (3) distribute copies of the work by 
sale or otherwise; and, with respect to certain artistic works, (4) perform the work publicly; and (5) 
display the work publicly. See 17 U.S.C. § 106(1)-(5).  

Section 301 thus preempts only those state law rights that "may be abridged by an act which, in 
and  of  itself,  would  infringe  one  of  the  exclusive  rights"  provided  by  federal  copyright  law. See 
Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enters., 723 F.2d 195, 200 (2d Cir. 1983), rev'd on other 
grounds, 471 U.S. 539, 85 L. Ed. 2d 588, 105 S. Ct. 2218 (1985). But if an "extra element" is "re-
quired instead of or in addition to the acts of reproduction, performance, distribution or display, in 
order  to  constitute  a  state-created  cause  of  action,  then  the  right  does  not  lie  'within  the  general 
scope of copyright,' and there is no preemption." 1 Nimmer § 1.01[B], at 1-14-15; see also Harper 
& Row, Publishers, Inc., 723 F.2d at 200 (where state law right "is predicated upon an act incorpo-
rating elements beyond mere reproduction or the like, the [federal and state] rights are not equiva-
lent" and there is no preemption).  

 

23 

 

A state law claim is not preempted if the "extra element" changes the "nature of the action so 
that it is qualitatively different from a copyright infringement claim." Mayer v. Josiah Wedgwood & 
Sons, Ltd., 601 F. Supp. 1523, 1535 (S.D.N.Y. 1985); see Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc., 723 F.2d 
at 201.  To determine whether a claim meets this standard, we must determine "what plaintiff seeks 
to protect, the theories in which the matter is thought to be protected and the rights sought to be en-
forced." 1 Roger M. Milgrim, Milgrim on Trade Secrets § 2.06A[3], at 2-150 (1992) (hereinafter 
"Milgrim"). An action will not be saved from preemption by elements such as awareness or intent, 
which alter "the action's scope but not its nature . . . ." Mayer, 601 F. Supp. at 1535.  

Following this "extra element" test, we have held that unfair competition and misappropriation 
claims grounded solely in the copying of a plaintiff's protected expression are preempted by section 
301. See, e.g., Walker v. Time Life Films, Inc., 784 F.2d 44, 53 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 476 U.S. 
1159, 90 L. Ed. 2d 721, 106 S. Ct. 2278 (1986); Warner Bros. Inc. v. American Broadcasting Cos., 
720 F.2d 231, 247 (2d Cir. 1983); Durham Indus., Inc. v. Tomy Corp., 630 F.2d 905, 919 & n. 15 
(2d  Cir.  1980).  We  also  have  held  to  be  preempted  a  tortious  interference  with  contract  claim 
grounded  in  the  impairment    of  a  plaintiff's  right  under  the  Copyright  Act  to  publish  derivative 
works. See Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc., 723 F.2d at 201.  

However,  many  state  law  rights  that  can  arise  in  connection  with  instances  of  copyright  in-
fringement satisfy the extra element test, and thus are not preempted by section 301. These include 
unfair competition claims based upon breach of confidential relationship, breach of fiduciary duty 
and trade secrets. Balboa Ins. Co. v. Trans Global Equities, 218 Cal. App. 3d 1327, 1339-53, 267 
Cal. Rptr. 787, 793-803 (Ct. App. 3rd Dist.), cert. denied, 111 S. Ct. 347, 112 L. Ed. 2d 311 (1990).  
Trade  secret  protection,  the  branch  of  unfair  competition  law  at  issue  in  this  case,  remains  a 
"uniquely valuable" weapon in the defensive arsenal of computer programmers. See 1 Milgrim § 
2.06A[5][c],  at  2-172.4.  Precisely  because  trade  secret  doctrine  protects  the  discovery  of  ideas, 
processes, and systems which are explicitly precluded from coverage under copyright law, courts 
and commentators alike consider it a necessary and integral part of the intellectual property protec-
tion extended to computer programs. See id.; Integrated Cash Management Servs., Inc. v. Digital 
Transactions, Inc., 920 F.2d 171, 173 (2d Cir. 1990) (while plaintiff withdrew copyright infringe-
ment  claim  for  misappropriation  of  computer  program,  relief  for  theft  of  trade  secret  sustained); 
Healthcare Affiliated Servs., Inc. v. Lippany, 701 F. Supp. 1142, 1152-55 (W.D.Pa. 1988) (finding 
likelihood  of  success  on  trade  secret  claim,  but  not  copyright  claim);  Q-Co  Indus.,  Inc.,  625  F. 
Supp.  at  616-18  (finding  likelihood  of  success  on  trade  secret  claim,  but  no  merit  to  copyright 
claim); Kretschmer, at 847-49.  

The legislative history of section 301 states that "the evolving common law rights of . . . trade 
secrets . . . would remain unaffected as long as the causes of action contain elements, such as . . . a 
breach of trust or confidentiality, that are different in kind from copyright infringement." House Re-
port, at 5748. Congress did not consider the term "misappropriation" to be "necessarily synonymous 
with copyright infringement," or to serve as the talisman of preemption. Id.  

Trade secret claims often are grounded upon a defendant's breach of a duty of trust or confi-
dence to the plaintiff through improper disclosure of confidential material. See, e.g., Mercer v. C.A. 
Roberts Co., 570 F.2d 1232, 1238 (5th Cir. 1978); Brignoli v. Balch Hardy and Scheinman, Inc., 
645 F. Supp. 1201, 1205 (S.D.N.Y. 1986). The defendant's breach of duty is the gravamen of such 
trade secret claims, and supplies the "extra element" that qualitatively distinguishes such trade se-
cret causes of action from claims for copyright infringement that are based solely upon copying. 

 

24 

 

See, e.g., Warrington Assoc., Inc. v. Real-Time Eng'g Sys., Inc., 522 F. Supp. 367, 369 (N.D. Ill. 
1981);  Brignoli,  645  F.  Supp.  at  1205;  see  also  generally  Balboa  Ins.  Co.,  218  Cal.  App.  3d  at 
1346-50, 267 Cal. Rptr. at 798-802 (reviewing cases).  

B. Preemption in this Case 
The district court stated that:  
Were CA's [trade secret] allegations premised on a theory of illegal acquisition of a trade secret, 
a charge that might have been alleged against Arney, who is not a defendant in this case, the pre-
emption  analysis  might  be  different,  for  there  seems  to  be  no  corresponding  right  guaranteed  to 
copyright owners by § 106 of the copyright act.  
  
Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 565. However, the court concluded that CA's trade secret claims 
were not grounded in a theory that Altai violated a duty of confidentiality to CA. Rather, Judge Pratt 
stated that CA proceeded against Altai solely "on a theory that the misappropriation took place by 
Altai's  use  of  ADAPTER--the  same  theory  as  the  copyright  infringement  count."  Id.  The  district 
court reasoned that "the right to be free from trade secret misappropriation through 'use', and the 
right to exclusive reproduction and distribution of a copyrighted work are not distinguishable." Id. 
Because he concluded that there was no qualitative difference between the elements of CA's state 
law trade secret claims and a claim for federal copyright infringement, Judge Pratt ruled that CA's 
trade secret claims were preempted by section 301.  

We agree with CA that the district court failed to address fully the factual and theoretical bases 
of CA's trade secret claims. The district court relied upon the fact that Arney--not Altai--allegedly 
breached a duty to CA of confidentiality by stealing secrets from CA and incorporating those se-
crets into OSCAR 3.4. However, under a wrongful acquisition theory based on Restatement (First) 
of Torts § 757 (1939), Williams and Altai may be liable for violating CA's right of confidentiality. 
Section 757 states in relevant part:  

One who discloses or uses another's trade secret, without a privilege to do so, is liable to another 
if . . . . (c) he learned the secret from a third person with notice of the fact that it was a secret and 
that the third person discovered it by improper means or that the third person's disclosure of it was 
otherwise a breach of his duty to the other . . . . 

Actual notice is not required for such a third party acquisition claim; constructive notice is suffi-
cient. A defendant is on constructive notice when, "from the information which he has, a reasonable 
man would infer [a breach of confidence], or if, under the circumstances, a reasonable man would 
be put on inquiry and an inquiry pursued with reasonable intelligence and diligence would disclose 
the [breach]." Id., comment 1; Metallurgical Indus., Inc. v. Fourtek, Inc., 790 F.2d 1195, 1204 (5th 
Cir. 1986); Vantage Point, Inc. v. Parker Bros., Inc., 529 F. Supp. 1204, 1210 n.2 (E.D.N.Y. 1981), 
aff'd, 697 F.2d 301 (2d Cir. 1982); see also Rohm and Haas Co. v. Adco Chem. Co., 689 F.2d 424, 
431 (3rd Cir. 1982) ("Defendants never asked where the 'Harvey process' had come from. Defen-
dants therefore were charged 'with whatever knowledge such inquiry would have led to.'") (citation 
omitted); Colgate-Palmolive Co. v. Carter Prods., Inc., 230 F.2d 855, 864 (4th Cir.) (per curiam) 
(defendant "'must have known by the exercise of fair business principles'" that its employee's work 
was covered by an agreement not to disclose) (citation omitted), cert. denied, 352 U.S. 843, 1 L. Ed. 
2d 59, 77 S. Ct. 43 (1956); 1 Milgrim § 5.04[2][c].  

 

25 

 

We agree with the district court that New Jersey's governing governmental interest choice of 
law analysis directs the application of Texas law to CA's trade secret misappropriation claim. See 
Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 566. Texas law recognizes trade secret misappropriation claims 
grounded in the reasoning of Restatement section 757(c), see, e.g., Fourtek, 790 F.2d at 1204, and 
the facts alleged by CA may well support such a claim.  

It is undisputed that, when Arney stole the ADAPTER code and incorporated it into his design 
of OSCAR 3.4, he breached his confidentiality agreement with CA. The district court noted that 
while such action might constitute a valid claim against Arney, CA is the named defendant in this 
lawsuit. Additionally, the district court found, as a matter of fact, that "no one at Altai, other than 
Arney, knew that Arney had the ADAPTER code . . . ." Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 554. 
However, the district court did not consider fully Altai's potential liability for improper trade secret 
acquisition. It did not consider the question of Altai's trade secret liability in connection with OS-
CAR 3.4 under a constructive notice theory, or Altai's potential liability under an actual notice the-
ory in connection with OSCAR 3.5. 

The district court found that, prior to CA's bringing suit, Altai was not on actual notice of Ar-
ney's theft of trade secrets, and incorporation of those secrets into OSCAR 3.4. However, by virtue 
of Williams' close relationship with Arney, Williams' general familiarity with CA's programs (hav-
ing once been employed by CA himself), and the fact that Arney used the ADAPTER program in an 
office at Altai adjacent to Williams during a period in which he had frequent contact with Williams 
regarding the OSCAR/VSE project, Williams (and through him Altai) may well have been on con-
structive notice of Arney's breach of his duty of confidentiality toward CA. The district court did 
not address whether Altai was on constructive notice, thereby placing it under a duty of inquiry; 
rather the court's finding that only Arney affirmatively knew of the theft of CA's trade secrets and 
incorporation of those secrets into OSCAR 3.4 simply disposed of the issue of actual notice in con-
nection with the creation of OSCAR 3.4. CA's claim of liability based on constructive notice, never 
considered in the district court's opinion, must be determined on remand.  

With respect to actual notice, it is undisputed that CA's first complaint, filed in August 1988, in-
formed Altai of Arney's trade secret violations in connection with the creation of OSCAR 3.4. The 
first  complaint  alleged  that  Arney  assisted  in  the  development  of  ADAPTER,  thereby  obtaining 
knowledge of CA's related trade secrets. It also alleged that Altai misappropriated CA's trade secrets 
by incorporating them into ZEKE.  

In response to CA's complaint, Altai rewrote OSCAR 3.4, creating OSCAR 3.5. While we agree 
with the district court that OSCAR 3.5 did not contain any expression protected by copyright, it 
may nevertheless still have embodied many of CA's trade secrets that Arney brought with him to 
Altai. Since Altai's rewrite was conducted with full knowledge of Arney's prior misappropriation, in 
breach of his duty of confidentiality, it follows that OSCAR 3.5 was created with actual knowledge 
of  trade  secret  violations.  Thus,  with  regard  to  OSCAR  3.5,  CA  has  a  viable  trade  secret  claim 
against Altai that must be considered by the district court on remand. This claim is grounded in Al-
tai's alleged use of CA's trade secrets in the creation of OSCAR 3.5, while on actual notice of Ar-
ney's theft of trade secrets and incorporation of those secrets into OSCAR 3.4. The district court 
correctly stated that a state law claim based solely upon Altai's "use", by copying, of ADAPTER's 
non-literal elements could not satisfy the governing "extra element" test, and would be preempted 
by section 301. However, where the use of copyrighted expression is simultaneously the violation 

 

26 

 

of a duty of confidentiality established by state law, that extra element renders the state right quali-
tatively distinct from the federal right, thereby foreclosing preemption under section 301.  

We  are  also  convinced  that  CA  adequately  pled  a  wrongful  acquisition  claim  before  Judge 
Mishler and Judge Pratt. In ruling that CA failed to properly plead a non-preempted claim, Judge 
Pratt relied heavily upon two allegations in CA's amended complaint.  Id. at 563-64. They read as 
follows:  

P 57. By reason of the facts stated in paragraph 39 and by copying from CA-SCHEDULER into 
ZEKE, ZACK and ZEBB the various elements stated in paragraphs 39-51, 54 and 55, defendant 
Altai has infringed [CA's] copyright in CA-SCHEDULER.  

* * * 

P 73. Defendant's incorporation into its ZEKE, ZACK and ZEBB programs of the various ele-
ments contained in the ADAPTER component of [CA's] CA-SCHEDULER program as set out in 
paragraphs 39-51,  54 and 55 constitutes the willful misappropriation of the proprietary property 
and trade secrets of plaintiff [CA].  

  From  these  pleadings,  Judge  Pratt  concluded  that  the  very  same  act,  i.e.,  Altai's  copying  of 
various elements of CA's program, was the basis for both CA's copyright infringement and trade 
secret claims. See id. at 564. We agree with Judge Pratt that CA's allegations are somewhat inart-
fully  stated.  However,  when  taken  together,  the  terms  "incorporation"  and  "misappropriation"  in 
paragraph 73 above suggest to us an act of a qualitatively different nature than the infringement 
pled  in  paragraph  57.  House  Report,  at  5748  ("'misappropriation'  is  not  necessarily  synonymous 
with copyright infringement").  

In support of our reading, we note that paragraphs 65-75 of CA's amended complaint alleged 
facts that reasonably comprise the elements of a wrongful acquisition of trade secrets claim. CA 
averred  that,  while  he  was  employed  at  CA,  Arney  learned  CA's  trade  secrets  regarding  the 
ADAPTER program. CA further alleged that after Arney went to work for Altai, Altai misappropri-
ated those trade secrets by incorporating CA's ADAPTER program into its own product. Finally, 
CA claimed that the trade secret misappropriation was carried out "in a willful, wanton and reckless 
manner in disregard of [CA's] rights." In other words, Altai could have reasonably inferred from 
CA's allegations that CA's claim, in part, rested on Williams' "wanton and reckless" behavior in the 
face of constructive notice.  

In addition, while responding to Altai's preemption argument in its motion to dismiss and for 
summary judgment, CA specifically argued in its brief to Judge Mishler that "it can easily be in-
ferred that Mr. Arney was hired by Altai to misappropriate [CA's] confidential source code for Al-
tai's benefit." At oral argument, CA further contended that:  

The  circumstances  of  Mr.  Arney's  hiring  suggested  that  Mr.  Williams  wanted  more  than  Mr. 
Arney's ability and in fact got exactly what he wanted. And that is Computer Associates' confiden-
tial Adapter technology.  

* * * 

[Arney  testified  that  he]  surreptitiously  took  that  code  home  from  Computer  Associates  after 
giving notice he was going to go to work for Altai, and after being hired by Mr. Williams to come 
to Altai and reconstruct Zeke, to work on the MVS operating system.  

 

27 

 

In the aftermath of Judge Mishler's ruling in its favor on Altai's motion to dismiss and for sum-
mary  judgment,  CA  reasonably  believed  that  it  had  sufficiently  alleged  a  non-preempted  claim. 
And,  in  light  of  CA's  arguments  and  Judge  Mishler's  ruling,  Altai clearly  was  on  notice  that  the 
amended complaint placed non-preempted trade secret claims in play. See 5 Charles A. Wright & 
Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1215, at 136-38 (2d ed. 1990) (federal pleading 
standards require plaintiff to provide defendant with fair notice of claim and grounds it rests on).  

Accordingly,  we  vacate  the  judgment  of  the  district  court  and  remand  for  reconsideration  of 
those aspects of CA's trade secret claims related to Altai's alleged constructive notice of Arney's 
theft of CA's trade secrets and incorporation of those secrets into OSCAR 3.4. We note, however, 
that CA may be unable to recover damages for its trade secrets which are embodied in OSCAR 3.4 
since Altai has conceded copyright liability and damages for its incorporation of ADAPTER into 
OSCAR 3.4. CA may not obtain a double recovery where the damages for copyright infringement 
and trade secret misappropriation are coextensive.  

However, additional trade secret damages may well flow from CA's creation of OSCAR 3.5. 
Judge Pratt correctly acknowledged that "if CA's claim of misappropriation of trade secrets did not 
fail on preemption grounds, it would be necessary to examine in some detail the conflicting claims 
and evidence relating to the process by which Altai rewrote OSCAR and ultimately produced ver-
sion 3.5." Computer Assocs., 775 F. Supp. at 554-55; see also 1 Milgrim § 5.04[2][d], at 5-148 ("af-
ter notice, the [innocent] second user should cease the use, and if he does not he can be enjoined and 
held liable for damages arising from such use subsequent to notice"). Since we hold that CA's trade 
secret claims   are not preempted, and that, in writing OSCAR 3.5, Altai had actual notice of Ar-
ney's earlier trade secret violations, we vacate and remand for such further inquiry anticipated by 
the district court. If the district court finds that CA was injured by Altai's unlawful use of CA's trade 
secrets in creating OSCAR 3.5, CA is entitled to an award of damages for trade secret misappro-
priation,  as  well  as consideration  by  the  district  court  of  CA's  request  for  injunctive  relief  on  its 
trade secret claim.  

CONCLUSION 

In adopting the above three step analysis for substantial similarity between the non-literal ele-
ments of computer programs, we seek to insure two things: (1) that programmers may receive ap-
propriate copyright protection for innovative utilitarian works containing expression; and (2) that 
non-protectable technical expression remains in the public domain for others to use freely as build-
ing blocks in their own work. At first blush, it may seem counter-intuitive that someone who has 
benefited to some degree from illicitly obtained material can emerge from an infringement suit rela-
tively unscathed. However, so long as the appropriated material consists of non-protectable expres-
sion, "this result is neither unfair nor unfortunate. It is the means by which copyright advances the 
progress of science and art." Feist, 111 S. Ct. at 1290.  

Furthermore, we underscore that so long as trade secret law is employed in a manner that does 
not encroach upon the exclusive domain of the Copyright Act, it is an appropriate means by which 
to secure compensation for software espionage.  

Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the district court in part; vacate in part; and remand for 
further proceedings. The parties shall bear their own costs of appeal, including the petition for re-
hearing.   
 

 

28 

 

ALTIMARI, Circuit Judge, Concurring in part and Dissenting in part:  
Because I believe that our original opinion, see Computer Assoc. Int'l v. Altai, 1992 U.S. App. 
LEXIS 14305, 1992 WL 139364 (2d Cir. 1992), is a reasoned analysis of the issues presented, I ad-
here to the original determination and therefore concur in Part 1 and respectfully dissent from Part 2 
of the amended opinion.    

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

29 

