5/7/2017

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co. (full text) :: 188 U.S. 239 (1903) :: Justia U.S. Supreme Court Center

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing
Co.  
188 U.S. 239 (1903)

Syllabus  |  Case

U.S. Supreme Court

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188
U.S. 239 (1903)

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Company

No. 117

Decided February 2, 1903

188 U.S. 239

ERROR TO THE CIRCUIT COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

Syllabus

Chromolithographs representing actual groups of persons and things, which have been
designed from hints or descriptions of the scenes represented, and which are to be used
as advertisements for a circus are "pictorial illustrations" within the meaning of
Rev.Stat. § 4962, allowing a copyright to the "author, designer, or proprietor . . . of any
engraving, cut, print, . . . or chromo" as affected by the act of 1874, c. 301, § 3, 18 Stat.

https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/188/239/case.html

1/7

5/7/2017

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co. (full text) :: 188 U.S. 239 (1903) :: Justia U.S. Supreme Court Center

78, 79. And on complying with all the statutory requirements, the proprietors are
entitled to the protection of the copyright laws.

The case is stated in the opinion of the Court.

Page 188 U. S. 248

MR. JUSTICE HOLMES delivered the opinion of the Court.

This case comes here from the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Sixth
Circuit by writ of error. Act of March 3, 1891, 26 Stat. 828, s. 517, § 6. It is an action
brought by the plaintiffs in error to recover the penalties prescribed for infringements of
copyrights. Rev.Stat. §§ 4952, 4956, 4965, amended by Act of March 3, 1891, 26 Stat.
1109, c. 565, and Act of March 2, 1895, 28 Stat. 965, c. 194. The alleged infringements
consisted in the copying in reduced form of three chromolithographs prepared by
employees of the plaintiffs for advertisements of a circus owned by one Wallace. Each of
the three contained a portrait of Wallace in the corner, and lettering bearing some slight
relation to the scheme of decoration, indicating the subject of the design and the fact
that the reality was to be seen at the circus. One of the designs was of an ordinary ballet,
one of a number of men and women, described as the Stirk family, performing on
bicycles, and one of groups of men and women whitened to represent statues. The
circuit court directed a verdict for the defendant on the ground that the
chromolithographs were not within the protection of the copyright law, and this ruling
was sustained by the circuit court of appeals. Courier Lithographing Co. v. Donaldson
Lithographing Co., 104 F. 993.

There was evidence warranting the inference that the designs belonged to the plaintiffs,
they having been produced by persons employed and paid by the plaintiffs in their
establishment to make those very things. Gill v. United States, 160 U. S. 426,

Page 188 U. S. 249

160 U. S. 435; Colliery Engineer Company v. United Correspondence Schools
Company, 94 F. 152; Carte v. Evans, 27 F. 861. It fairly might be found also that the
copyrights were taken out in the proper names. One of them was taken out in the name
of the Courier Company and the other two in the name of the Courier Lithographing
Company. The former was the name of an unincorporated joint-stock association
formed under the laws of New York, Laws of 1894, c. 235, and made up of the plaintiffs,

https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/188/239/case.html

2/7

5/7/2017

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co. (full text) :: 188 U.S. 239 (1903) :: Justia U.S. Supreme Court Center

the other a trade variant on that name. Scribner v. Clark, 50 F. 473, 474, 475, S.C. sub
nom. Belford v. Scribner, 144 U. S. 488.

Finally, there was evidence that the pictures were copyrighted before publication. There
may be a question whether the use by the defendant for Wallace was not lawful within
the terms of the contract with Wallace, or a more general one as to what rights the
plaintiff reserved. But we cannot pass upon these questions as matter of law; they will
be for the jury when the case is tried again, and therefore we come at once to the ground
of decision in the courts below. That ground was not found in any variance between
pleading and proof, such as was put forward in argument, but in the nature and purpose
of the designs.

We shall do no more than mention the suggestion that painting and engraving, unless
for a mechanical end, are not among the useful arts, the progress of which Congress is
empowered by the Constitution to promote. The Constitution does not limit the useful
to that which satisfies immediate bodily needs. Burrow­Giles Lithographic Co. v.
Sarony, 111 U. S. 53. It is obvious also that the plaintiff's case is not affected by the fact,
if it be one, that the pictures represent actual groups -- visible things. They seem from
the testimony to have been composed from hints or description, not from sight of a
performance. But even if they had been drawn from the life, that fact would not deprive
them of protection. The opposite proposition would mean that a portrait by Velasquez
or Whistler was common property because others might try their hand on the same face.
Others are free to copy the original. They are not free to copy the copy. Blunt v. Patten, 2
Paise 397, 400. See Kelly v.

Page 188 U. S. 250

Morris, L.R. 1 Eq. 697; Morris v. Wright, L.R. 5 Ch. 279. The copy is the personal
reaction of an individual upon nature. Personality always contains something unique. It
expresses its singularity even in handwriting, and a very modest grade of art has in it
something irreducible which is one man's alone. That something he may copyright
unless there is a restriction in the words of the act.

If there is a restriction, it is not to be found in the limited pretensions of these particular
works. The least pretentious picture has more originality in it than directories and the
like, which may be copyrighted. Drone, Copyright 153. See Henderson v. Tompkins, 60
F. 758, 765. The amount of training required for humbler efforts than those before us is
well indicated by Ruskin.

https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/188/239/case.html

3/7

5/7/2017

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co. (full text) :: 188 U.S. 239 (1903) :: Justia U.S. Supreme Court Center

"If any young person, after being taught what is, in polite circles, called 'drawing,' will
try to copy the commonest piece of real work -- suppose a lithograph on the title page of
a new opera air, or a woodcut in the cheapest illustrated newspaper of the day -- they
will find themselves entirely beaten."

Elements of Drawing, first ed. 3. There is no reason to doubt that these prints, in their
ensemble and in all their details, in their design and particular combinations of figures,
lines, and colors, are the original work of the plaintiffs' designer. If it be necessary, there
is express testimony to that effect. It would be pressing the defendant's right to the
verge, if not beyond, to leave the question of originality to the jury upon the evidence in
this case, as was done in Hegeman v. Springer, 110 F. 374.

We assume that the construction of Rev.Stat. § 4952, allowing a copyright to the
"author, designer, or proprietor . . . of any engraving, cut, print . . . [or] chromo," is
affected by the act of 1874, 18 Stat. 78, 79, c. 301, § 3. That section provides that,

"in the construction of this act, the words 'engraving,' 'cut,' and 'print' shall be applied
only to pictorial illustrations or works connected with the fine arts."

We see no reason for taking the words "connected with the fine arts" as qualifying
anything except the word "works," but it would not change our decision if we should
assume further that they also qualified "pictorial illustrations," as the defendant
contends.

Page 188 U. S. 251

These chromolithographs are "pictorial illustrations." The word "illustrations" does not
mean that they must illustrate the text of a book, and that the etchings of Rembrandt or
Muller's engraving of the Madonna di San Sisto could not be protected today if any man
were able to produce them. Again, the act, however construed, does not mean that
ordinary posters are not good enough to be considered within its scope. The antithesis
to "illustrations or works connected with the fine arts" is not works of little merit or of
humble degree, or illustrations addressed to the less educated classes; it is "prints or
labels designed to be used for any other articles of manufacture." Certainly works are
not the less connected with the fine arts because their pictorial quality attracts the
crowd, and therefore gives them a real use -- if use means to increase trade and to help
to make money. A picture is nonetheless a picture, and nonetheless a subject of
copyright, that it is used for an advertisement. And if pictures may be used to advertise

https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/188/239/case.html

4/7

5/7/2017

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co. (full text) :: 188 U.S. 239 (1903) :: Justia U.S. Supreme Court Center

soap, or the theater, or monthly magazines, as they are, they may be used to advertise a
circus. Of course, the ballet is as legitimate a subject for illustration as any other. A rule
cannot be laid down that would excommunicate the paintings of Degas.

Finally, the special adaptation of these pictures to the advertisement of the Wallace
shows does not prevent a copyright. That may be a circumstance for the jury to consider
in determining the extent of Mr. Wallace's rights, but it is not a bar. Moreover, on the
evidence, such prints are used by less pretentious exhibitions when those for whom they
were prepared have given them up.

It would be a dangerous undertaking for persons trained only to the law to constitute
themselves final judges of the worth of pictorial illustrations, outside of the narrowest
and most obvious limits. At the one extreme, some works of genius would be sure to
miss appreciation. Their very novelty would make them repulsive until the public had
learned the new language in which their author spoke. It may be more than doubted, for
instance, whether the etchings of Goya or the paintings of Manet would have been sure
of protection when seen for the first time. At the other end, copyright would be denied
to

Page 188 U. S. 252

pictures which appealed to a public less educated than the judge. Yet if they command
the interest of any public, they have a commercial value -- it would be bold to say that
they have not an aesthetic and educational value -- and the taste of any public is not to
be treated with contempt. It is an ultimate fact for the moment, whatever may be our
hopes for a change. That these pictures had their worth and their success is sufficiently
shown by the desire to reproduce them without regard to the plaintiffs' rights. See
Henderson v. Tompkins, 60 F. 758, 765. We are of opinion that there was evidence that
the plaintiffs have rights entitled to the protection of the law.

The judgment of the circuit court of appeals is reversed; the judgment of the circuit
court is also reversed, and the cause remanded to that court with directions to set
aside the verdict and grant a new trial.

MR. JUSTICE HARLAN, dissenting:

Judges Lurton, Day, and Severens, of the circuit court of appeals, concurred in affirming
the judgment of the district court. Their views were thus expressed in an opinion
delivered by Judge Lurton:

https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/188/239/case.html

5/7

5/7/2017

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co. (full text) :: 188 U.S. 239 (1903) :: Justia U.S. Supreme Court Center

"What we hold is this: that if a chromo, lithograph, or other print, engraving, or picture
has no other use than that of a mere advertisement, and no value aside from this
function, it would not be promotive of the useful arts within the meaning of the
constitutional provision, to protect the 'author' in the exclusive use thereof, and the
copyright statute should not be construed as including such a publication if any other
construction is admissible. If a mere label simply designating or describing an article to
which it is attached, and which has no value separated from the article, does not come
within the constitutional clause upon the subject of copyright, it must follow that a
pictorial illustration designed and useful only as an advertisement, and having no
intrinsic value other than its function as an advertisement, must be equally without the
obvious meaning of the Constitution.

Page 188 U. S. 253

It must have some connection with the fine arts to give it intrinsic value, and that it shall
have is the meaning which we attach to the Act of June 18, 1874, amending the
provisions of the copyright law. We are unable to discover anything useful or
meritorious in the design copyrighted by the plaintiffs in error other than as an
advertisement of acts to be done or exhibited to the public in Wallace's show. No
evidence, aside from the deductions which are to be drawn from the prints themselves,
was offered to show that these designs had any original artistic qualities. The jury could
not reasonably have found merit or value aside from the purely business object of
advertising a show, and the instruction to find for the defendant was not error. Many
other points have been urged as justifying the result reached in the court below. We find
it unnecessary to express any opinion upon them in view of the conclusion already
announced. The judgment must be affirmed."

Courier Lithographing Co. v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 104 F. 993, 996.

I entirely concur in these views, and therefore dissent from the opinion and judgment of
this Court. The clause of the Constitution giving Congress power to promote the
progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited terms to authors and
inventors the exclusive right to their respective works and discoveries, does not, as I
think, embrace a mere advertisement of a circus.

MR. JUSTICE McKENNA authorizes me to say that he also dissents.

https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/188/239/case.html

6/7

5/7/2017

Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co. (full text) :: 188 U.S. 239 (1903) :: Justia U.S. Supreme Court Center

Disclaimer: Official Supreme Court case law is only found in the print version of the United States
Reports. Justia case law is provided for general informational purposes only, and may not reflect
current legal developments, verdicts or settlements. We make no warranties or guarantees about the
accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained on this site or information linked
to from this site. Please check official sources.

https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/188/239/case.html

7/7

