Vault with Coca-Cola Trade Secret Formula on Public Display - IPWatchdog.com | Patents & Patent Law

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Vault with Coca-Cola Trade
Secret Formula on Public Display

By Gene Quinn
Gene Quinn 
January 6, 2012

Print Article

Last month The Coca-Cola Company did something rather
extraordinary.  For the first time in history the vault containing
the trade secret formula that makes up the Coca-Cola empire
will be visible to the public in a permanent exhibit titled The
Vault of the Secret Formula.  The exhibit opened on
December 8, 2011 at the World of Coca-Cola, which is a 60,000
square foot interactive Coca-Cola museum featuring more than

1,200 artifacts from around the world.

The secret Coca-Cola formula, perhaps the most famous of all trade secrets, has not been
moved for 86 years, but the The Coca-Cola Company has moved the 125-year-old secret
formula for Coca-Cola to a new home at the World of Coca-Cola in Atlanta. As the
capstone to the 125th anniversary year of Coca-Cola, the Company decided to share the
history of its secret formula in a new exhibit where visitors can experience one of the
world’s most recognized brands like never before.

A!er Dr. John S. Pemberton invented Coca-Cola in 1886, the formula was kept a close
secret, only shared with a small group and not written down. In 1891, Asa Candler
became the sole proprietor of Coca-Cola a!er purchasing the rights to the business.

http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2012/01/06/vault-with-coca-cola-trade-secret-formula-on-public-display/id=21588/

Page 1 of 7

Vault with Coca-Cola Trade Secret Formula on Public Display - IPWatchdog.com | Patents & Patent Law

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Then, in 1919, Ernest Woodru" and a group of investors purchased the Company from
Candler and his family. To finance the purchase Woodru" arranged a loan and as
collateral he provided documentation of the formula by asking Candler’s son to commit
the formula to paper. This was placed in a vault in the Guaranty Bank in New York until
the loan was repaid in 1925. At that point, Woodru" reclaimed the secret formula and
returned it to Atlanta and placed it in the Trust Company Bank, now SunTrust, where it
remained until its recent move to the World of Coca-Cola.

In preparation for the new exhibit The Coca-Cola Company transferred the secret formula
to the World of Coca-Cola from a vault at SunTrust Bank in downtown Atlanta where it
had been housed since 1925.

“The move of the Coca-Cola secret formula is a historic moment for the Company,” said
Phil Mooney, Director of Archives, The Coca-Cola Company. “The Company has always
gone to great lengths to protect it and now by safeguarding it at the World of Coca-Cola,
we can share its legendary legacy with people around the world.”

Can you imagine the security employed in transferring the trade secret from the SunTrust
Bank vault to the vault at the World of Coca-Cola?  The Coca-Cola formula has been
notorious with rampant rumors, creating its own urban mythology with respect to both
the formula and e"orts to protect the secret formula.  All you have to do is Google “coke
formula urban myth” and you will find all kinds of claims.  Thus, it seems almost a virtual
certainty that a new mythology will now be created and grow.

It has always seemed to me that Coca-Cola is very comfortable with the urban myths,
relishing them and even using them by some accounts to feed into the power of the trade
secret, not to mention using them to misdirect the public into thinking, rightly or
wrongly, that Fort Knox like security has always been employed to protect the formula.
Thus, it is not a surprise to learn that visitors to The Vault of the Secret Formula exhibit
will be treated to an immersive multimedia experience that celebrates the history,
mythology and intrigue around the secret formula.

“This is a special day in Coca-Cola history, and the perfect culmination to our 125th
anniversary celebrations this year,” said Muhtar Kent, Chairman and Chief Executive

http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2012/01/06/vault-with-coca-cola-trade-secret-formula-on-public-display/id=21588/

Page 2 of 7

Vault with Coca-Cola Trade Secret Formula on Public Display - IPWatchdog.com | Patents & Patent Law

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

O"icer, The Coca-Cola Company said on the day the exhibit opened. “By sharing this
secret formula experience with our consumers, we celebrate both the rich history of the
brand’s beginnings and the moments of refreshment and happiness to come for future
generations. This is yet another way we are recognizing and thanking everyone around
the world who has made the Coca-Cola brand what it is today.”

“Sharing this secret formula experience” with the public is a far cry from publicly
displaying the formula. A trade secret is defined as any valuable business information
that is not generally known and is subject to reasonable e"orts to preserve
confidentiality. The Coca-Cola secret formula easily qualifies as valuable business
information, with the value being derived from the fact that it is secret. As with any trade
secret, however, the Coca-Cola secret formula can only be a trade secret for so long as it
is actually secret.

Courts have identified a number of factors relevant to determining whether business
information satisfies the secrecy requirement. These factors include:

1.  The extent to which the information is known outside the business.
2.  The extent to which the information is known by employees and others involved

in the business.

3.  The extent of the measures undertaken by an employer to protect the secrecy of

the information.

4.  The value of the information to the employer
5.  The amount of e"ort or money expended by the employer in developing the

information.

6.  The ease or di"iculty with which the information could be properly acquired or

duplicated by others.

These factors are used by Courts to determine if the secrecy requirement is satisfied. 
These factors and similar considerations are necessary because insofar as trade secret
law is concerned the term “secret” does not have the same meaning as one would
attribute to the same term in everyday conversation. This is true primarily because the
information does not have to remain absolutely secret in order to be deserving of
protection. The definition requires that the information not be generally known by the
public.

http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2012/01/06/vault-with-coca-cola-trade-secret-formula-on-public-display/id=21588/

Page 3 of 7

Vault with Coca-Cola Trade Secret Formula on Public Display - IPWatchdog.com | Patents & Patent Law

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

With respect to the Coca-Cola secret formula the amount of e"ort and resources devoted
to keeping the information secret is considerable.  That is the only way that Coca-Cola
could keep the formula a trade secret.  Trade secret law looks to the e"orts to maintain
the secret in order to help establish whether the trade secret has ever or still does exist. 
This is something of a sliding scale reasonableness inquiry. The more valuable the secret
the more e"orts that need to be undertaken.  The less valuable the secret the fewer
e"orts that need to be taken to maintain the trade secret.

With the Coca-Cola formula being worth many billions of dollars to the company
extraordinary e"orts need to be employed.  I suppose a vault in a museum is a safe place,
but this type of public display seems rather out of character for Coca-Cola if you ask me.
Notwithstanding, guests to the World of Coca-Cola can feel closer than ever before to the
secret formula, perhaps adding to the mystery and intrigue.

Tags: coca cola, Dr. John Pembrerton, Ernest Woodru", Muhtar Kent, Phil Mooney, The
Vault of the Secret Formula, trade secret, Trade Secrets, World of Coca-Cola
Posted In: IP News, IPWatchdog.com Articles, Trade Secrets
There are currently 9 Comments comments.

1. 

EG January 6, 2012 8:29 am

“The Coca-Cola formula has been notorious with rampant rumors, creating its own urban
mythology with respect to both the formula and e"orts to protect the secret formula.”

Gene,

The fact that there are “rumors” about what this formula is (most likely the “rumors” are wrong
as it appears Coca-Cola is “fanning the flames” of those rumores) may even enhance the
“mystic” and thus the trade secret value of that formula.

2. 

John Spevacek January 6, 2012 11:43 am

What a pile of bunk.

http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2012/01/06/vault-with-coca-cola-trade-secret-formula-on-public-display/id=21588/

Page 4 of 7

Vault with Coca-Cola Trade Secret Formula on Public Display - IPWatchdog.com | Patents & Patent Law

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

I’m an engineer with lots of experience in manufacturing – there is no way that that formula is
only known to a handful of people or whatever they claim. All the suppliers to Coke know what
they are supplying, just as the purchasing departments know what they are buying, the QC
department knows what it is testing…

3. 

Gene Quinn January 6, 2012 2:35 pm

John-

There is a big di"erence between suppliers knowing what they are supplying and having the
recipe. Certainly the suppliers know what they ship to Coke, but it has been believed for years
that Coke engages in counter-measures to keep the true underlying secrets hidden. Years ago
they purchased 100% of the coco futures from Madagascar. Immediately some wondered
whether it is the particular bean from Madagascar that would make up one of the missing
pieces. Still others wondered if Coke did that just as part of their typical counter-measures.

I’m sure you are familiar with the fact that brand name products taste di"erent than generic
products even though they contain the same ingredients in the same proportions. There are a
great many things that can influence taste, including behind the scenes processes wholly
disassociated from the actual ingredients used.

-Gene

4. 

John Roethel January 6, 2012 2:57 pm

I wonder if:
1. The secret formula is the original formula that used cocaine and is no longer in use.
2. The secret formula uses ingredients or processing steps that are no longer permitted under
law and therefore is no longer in use.
3. I hired Danny Ocean to steal the secret formula and then published it on the internet, how
would the damages be measured if the secret formula was no longer in use.

http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2012/01/06/vault-with-coca-cola-trade-secret-formula-on-public-display/id=21588/

Page 5 of 7

Vault with Coca-Cola Trade Secret Formula on Public Display - IPWatchdog.com | Patents & Patent Law

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

4. Coca Cola has insurance to make it whole if someone reveals the secret formula.

Just wondering….

5. 

Stan E. Delo January 7, 2012 12:16 pm

John and Gene-

One story I heard was that there were 4 plants that each just made portions of the whole
formula. Each location only had their own particular portion of the recipe, so that it was
basically nearly impossible for anyone to get their hands on the whole formula. That’s not even
to mention Gene’s point about not knowing how the ingredients are treated. Simple sugar
when treated in a certain way becomes caramel, for instance, which is Way di"erent in taste
than it’s precursor.

Perhaps just another urban myth, but the approach made a whole lot of sense to me. Here at
the Kool-Aid West labs we use a similar approach, but I can’t say more than that or my
shareholders will probably get very upset with me…..

Stan~

Stan E. Delo January 7, 2012 6:30 pm

Gene-

Looks like your filter ate my homework for some reason. I usually use create mail to keep a
copy, but not this time.

Blind Dogma January 8, 2012 9:44 am

“Here at the Kool-Aid West labs we use a similar ”

6. 

7. 

http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2012/01/06/vault-with-coca-cola-trade-secret-formula-on-public-display/id=21588/

Page 6 of 7

Vault with Coca-Cola Trade Secret Formula on Public Display - IPWatchdog.com | Patents & Patent Law

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Careful Stan, even what we keep as secret is secret in regards to our Kool-AId production.

Loose lips sink ships…(the competition out there is fierce, you have brewed well and there are
drinkers everywhere wanting what we provide).

8. 

Stan E. Delo January 8, 2012 2:19 pm

BD-

Roger that, and I will be more careful in the future. Part of my message that seems to have
vanished into cyberspace was to announce that the brand name henceforth will be Kewl-Aid, to
avoid any possible confusion in the marketplace.

I also mentioned that I believe that Trade Secrets are governed by state law, so I find it
somewhat interesting that the PUR’s in the AIA seems to be a Federal codification of Trade
Secrets?, as they relate to escaping infringement responsibility of a valid patent.

9. 

PCL January 11, 2012 4:31 pm

I have to admit that I’m just fine with most store-brand diet cola, though there is some subtle
quality in diet coke that’s just missing from them. Maybe it’s some certain specie of crushed
beetles, or just the right brand of shoe polish. Guess we’ll never know for sure.

http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2012/01/06/vault-with-coca-cola-trade-secret-formula-on-public-display/id=21588/

Page 7 of 7

