FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS

FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

DC COMICS,

Plaintiff-Appellee,

v.

MARK TOWLE, an individual, DBA
Garage Gotham,

Defendant-Appellant.

No. 13-55484

D.C. No.

2:11-cv-03934-

RSWL-OP

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court

for the Central District of California

Ronald S.W. Lew, Senior District Judge, Presiding

Argued and Submitted

February 5, 2015—Pasadena, California

Filed September 23, 2015

Before: Michael J. Melloy,* Jay S. Bybee,

and Sandra S. Ikuta, Circuit Judges.

Opinion by Judge Ikuta

   * The Honorable Michael J. Melloy, Senior Circuit Judge for the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, sitting by designation.

2

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

SUMMARY**

Copyright / Trademark

The panel affirmed the district court’s summary judgment
in a copyright and trademark infringement action brought by
DC Comics against a maker of Batmobile replicas.

The panel held that the Batmobile, as it appeared in the
Batman comic books, television series, and motion picture,
was entitled to copyright protection because this automotive
character was a sufficiently distinctive element of the works. 
The panel held that DC Comics owned a copyright interest in
the Batmobile character, as expressed in the 1966 television
series and the 1989 motion picture, because it did not transfer
its underlying rights to the character when it licensed rights
to  produce  derivative  works.    The  panel  held  that  the
defendant’s replica cars infringed on DC Comics’ copyrights.

The  panel  affirmed  the  district  court’s  ruling  that  the
defendant could not assert a laches defense to DC Comics’
trademark infringement claim because he willfully infringed
DC’s trademarks.

   ** This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court.  It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

3

COUNSEL

Larry  Zerner  (argued),  Law  Offices  of  Larry  Zerner,  Los
Angeles, California; Edwin F. McPherson and Tracy B. Rane,
McPherson  Rane  LLP,  Los  Angeles,  California,  for
Defendant-Appellant.

James  D.  Weinberger  (argued),  Roger  L.  Zissu,  and  Leo
Kittay,  Fross  Zelnick  Lehrman &  Zissu,  P.C.,  New York,
New  York;  J.  Andrew  Coombs,  J.  Andrew  Coombs,  A
Professional Corporation, Glendale, California, for Plaintiff-
Appellee.

OPINION

IKUTA, Circuit Judge:

We are asked to decide whether defendant Mark Towle
infringed  DC  Comics’  exclusive  rights  under  a  copyright
when  he  built  and  sold  replicas  of  the  Batmobile,  as  it
appeared in the 1966 television show Batman and the 1989
film BATMAN.  Holy copyright law, Batman!

I

DC Comics (DC) is the publisher and copyright owner of
comic  books  featuring  the  story  of  the  world-famous
character, Batman.  Since his first comic book appearance in
1939, the Caped Crusader has protected Gotham City from
villains with the help of his sidekick Robin the Boy Wonder,
his utility belt, and of course, the Batmobile.

4

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

Originally introduced in the Batman comic books in 1941,
the  Batmobile  is  a  fictional,  high-tech  automobile  that
Batman employs as his primary mode of transportation.  The
Batmobile has varied in appearance over the years, but its
name and key characteristics as Batman’s personal crime-
fighting  vehicle  have  remained  consistent.    Over  the  past
eight decades, the comic books have continually depicted the
Batmobile as possessing bat-like external features, ready to
leap into action to assist Batman in his fight against Gotham’s
most  dangerous  villains,  and  equipped  with  futuristic
weaponry and technology that is “years ahead of anything
else on wheels.”

Since its creation in the comic books, the Batmobile has
also  been  depicted  in  numerous  television  programs  and
motion pictures.  Two of these depictions are relevant to this
case:  the 1966 television series Batman, starring Adam West,
and  the  1989  motion  picture  BATMAN,  starring  Michael
Keaton.

The 1966 Batman television series was the product of a
licensing  agreement  between  DC’s  predecessor,  National
Periodical  Publications,  Inc.  (National  Periodical)  and  the
American Broadcasting Company (ABC).  In 1965, National
Periodical entered into a licensing agreement with ABC (the
1965  ABC  Agreement)  in  which  it  granted  ABC  “an
exclusive license to produce a series of half-hour television
programs . . . based upon the literary property consisting of
the comic book and comic strip stories entitled ‘Batman’ . . .
including  the  characters  therein.”    This  exclusive  right
included  the  right  to  “translate,  adapt,  [or]  arrange”  the
Batman literary property “to such extent as ABC may desire”

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

5

in the making of the television programs, and the right to
secure copyrights in the television programs produced.  The
agreement also provided that “[a]ll rights in the property not
specifically granted to ABC are hereby reserved to and may
be exercised by National at all times during the term of this
agreement”  except  as  otherwise  expressly  stated  in  the
agreement.  National Periodical’s reserved rights included
“[a]ll rights of publication,” and the exclusive merchandising
rights to all products manufactured or distributed under the
name of any character in the Batman comic books.

Under  this  agreement,  ABC  (through  a  series  of  sub-
licensing  agreements)  produced  the  1966  television  show
starring  Adam  West  as  Batman.    In  addition  to  Batman,
Robin, and the use of visual onomatopoeia that flashed on
screen  during  fight  scenes—Pow!    Boff!    Thwack!—the
television series featured the Batmobile.  The design of the
Batmobile  did  not  directly  copy  any  iterations  of  the
Batmobile as it appeared in the comic books.  As in the comic
books, however, the Batmobile in the 1966 television show
maintained  a  bat-like  appearance  and  was  equipped  with
state-of-the-art weaponry and technology.1

In  1979,  DC  again  licensed  its  rights  in  the  Batman
literary property, this time to Batman Productions, Inc. (BPI). 
In the agreement (the 1979 BPI Agreement), DC granted BPI
the exclusive right to create a motion picture based on the
“Property,” which was defined to include “[t]he names, titles,
fictional locations and fictional conveyances . . . as depicted
and contained in the comic magazines [published by DC],

   1 A photo of the Batmobile depicted in the 1966 television series, as well
as a photo of Towle’s replica of this Batmobile, can be found in Appendix
A.

6

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

which are identifiable with or associated with the fictional
character  known  as  ‘Batman,’  such  as  .  .  .  that  certain
conveyance  known  as  the  ‘Batmobile.’”    The  1979  BPI
Agreement  also  granted  BPI  the  right  to  “adapt,  use,  .  .  .
modify,  [or]  alter  .  .  .  the  Property”  for  the  purpose  of
producing  the  motion  picture.    Like  the  1965  ABC
Agreement,  the  1979  BPI  Agreement  provided  that  “[a]ll
rights in the Property not specifically granted to” BPI under
the agreement “are reserved to DC and may be exercised by
DC  at  all  times  without  any  limitation  or  restriction
whatsover  except  as  specifically  set  forth  herein.”    These
reserved rights included “[a]ll rights of publication in and to
the  Property,”  as  well  as  “[a]ll  ‘merchandising  rights’”  in
“products manufactured or distributed under the name of or
using a representation of ‘Batman’ or any other character or
thing included in the Property . . . or under a name which
incorporates any phrase, clause or expression used in DC’s
comic strips or comic magazines . . . .”

BPI subsequently sub-licensed its rights to Warner Bros.,
Inc., who eventually (through a number of additional sub-
licensing  agreements)  produced  the  1989  motion  picture
BATMAN, starring Michael Keaton as Batman.  Like the 1966
television  series,  the  1989  motion  picture  featured  a
Batmobile that was physically distinct from the Batmobile
portrayed in the comic books and the 1966 television series. 
Nonetheless, the Batmobile as portrayed in the motion picture
retained  a  bat-like  physical  appearance  and  was  again
equipped  with  futuristic  technology  and  crime-fighting
weaponry.2

   2 A photo of the Batmobile depicted in the 1989 motion picture, as well
as a photo of Towle’s replica of this Batmobile, can be found in Appendix
B.

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

7

Defendant  Mark  Towle  produces  replicas  of 

the
Batmobile as it appeared in both the 1966 television show and
1989  motion  picture  as  part  of  his  business  at  Gotham
Garage,  where  he  manufactures  and  sells  replicas  of
automobiles  featured  in  motion  pictures  or  television
programs.    Towle  concedes  that  these  replicas  copy  the
designs of the Batmobile as depicted on television and in the
motion picture, though they do not copy every feature.  Towle
then sells these vehicles for approximately $90,000 to “avid
car  collectors”  who  “know  the  entire  history  of  the
Batmobile.”  Towle also sells kits that allow customers to
modify their cars to look like the Batmobile, as it appeared in
the 1966 television show and the 1989 motion picture.

Before DC brought this lawsuit, Towle advertised each
replica  as  the  “Batmobile,”  and  used  the  domain  name
batmobilereplicas.com  to  market  his  business.    He  also
advertised that the replicas included such features as “custom
bat insignias, wheel bats, [and a] bat steering wheel,” and
would attract attention due to the fame of the Batmobile.  By
his  own  admission,  Towle  is  not  authorized  by  DC  to
manufacture or sell any products bearing DC’s copyright or
trademark.

In May 2011, DC filed this action against Towle, alleging,
among  other  things,  causes  of  action  for  copyright
infringement, trademark infringement, and unfair competition
arising from Towle’s manufacture and sale of the Batmobile
replicas.3  Towle denied that  he  had infringed upon DC’s

   3  DC clearly asserted in both its original and amended complaint that
the Batmobile in all of its forms, including the 1966 television program
and 1989 motion picture, is copyrightable subject matter owned by DC. 

8

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

copyright.  He claimed that the Batmobile as it appeared in
the 1966 television show and 1989 motion picture was not
subject to copyright protection.  Alternatively, Towle argued
that DC did not own the copyright in the Batmobile  as  it
appeared  in  either  production.    Towle  also  asserted  the
affirmative defense of laches.  The parties subsequently filed
cross  motions  for  partial  summary  judgment  as  to  DC’s
trademark, copyright, and unfair competition claims, and as
to Towle’s laches defense.

In a published order, the district court granted in part and
denied  in  part  DC’s  motion  for  summary  judgment,  and
denied Towle’s cross motion for summary judgment.  DC
Comics  v.  Towle,  989  F.  Supp.  2d  948  (C.D.  Cal.  2013). 
First,  the  district  court  held  that  the  Batmobile  was  a
character entitled to copyright protection.  In reaching this
conclusion,  the  district  court  made  a  number  of  findings. 
Among other things, it found that the Batmobile “is known by
one consistent name that identifies it as Batman’s personal
vehicle,”  and,  although  some  of  its  physical  traits  have
changed  over  time,  several  have  remained  consistent,
including  its  “high-tech  gadgets  and  weaponry,”  “bat-like
motifs,”  and  its  jet  black  color.    Additionally,  the  district
court found that the Batmobile is always “depicted as being
swift, cunning, strong and elusive,” and is even portrayed as
a “superhero” and “Batman’s sidekick, if not an extension of
Batman’s own persona.”4

We  thus  reject  Towle’s  argument  that  DC  has  failed  to  identify  the
copyrights at issue in this case.

   4 The district court also concluded, in the alternative, that the 1966 and
1989 Batmobiles were entitled to copyright protection as a sculptural work

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

9

Second,  the  district  court  held  that  DC  maintained  a
copyright in the Batmobile as it appeared in both the 1966
television  show  and  the  1989  motion  picture based on  its
ownership of the merchandising rights.  Alternatively,  the
district  court  concluded  that  DC  owns  a  copyright  in  the
Batmobile  as  it  appeared  in  each  production  because  the
appearance of the Batmobile in each production was derived
from the Batmobile depicted in DC’s comic books.  Finally,
the district court concluded that Towle infringed upon DC’s
copyright because he copied the Batmobile as it appeared in
the 1966 and 1989 productions in his replicas.  Accordingly,
the district court granted summary judgment on the copyright
infringement claim to DC.

The district court also granted summary judgment to DC
on  Towle’s  affirmative  laches  defense  to  the  trademark
infringement claim.  The court found that Towle admitted that
he knew of the Batman property and the various bat emblems
and symbols, and did not dispute “that he intentionally copied
the  designs”  of  the  Batmobile  as  it  appeared  in  the  1966
television  show  and  1989  motion  picture,  which  included
DC’s Batman trademarks.  He also intentionally referred to
his replicas as “Batmobiles.”  Therefore, the court concluded
that Towle acted in bad faith and intentionally copied DC’s
trademarks “so as to associate his products with the Batman
films and television show.”

Finally, the court denied DC’s summary judgment motion
on  Towle’s  laches  defense  to  the  copyright  infringement
claim because it determined that there was a genuine dispute
of  fact  as  to  whether  Towle  was  aware  that  copying  the

under 17 U.S.C. § 102(a)(5).  Because we agree that the Batmobile is a
character entitled to copyright protection, we need not reach this issue.

10

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

Batmobile as it appeared in the 1966 television show and
1989 motion picture constituted copyright infringement.

After  the  district  court  issued  its  decision,  the  parties
entered into a joint stipulation in which they agreed that the
district court would enter a judgment against Towle on DC’s
copyright infringement and other claims.  They also agreed
that, except as provided in the stipulation, all claims were to
be  dismissed  with  prejudice.    The  district  court  entered  a
judgment  consistent  with  this  stipulation  on  February  22,
2013, and Towle timely appealed.

Because  the  parties  entered  into  a  stipulation  that
finalized the district court order, we have jurisdiction over
this  appeal  under  28  U.S.C.  §  1291.    See  Dannenberg  v.
Software Toolworks Inc., 16 F.3d 1073, 1074–75 (9th Cir.
1994).

II

In order to prevail on its claim for copyright infringement,
DC must prove that it owns a copyright in the Batmobile as
it appeared in the 1966 television series and 1989 movie, and
that Towle infringed that copyright by creating unauthorized
replicas.  See Entm’t Research Grp., Inc. v. Genesis Creative
Grp., Inc., 122 F.3d 1211, 1217 (9th Cir. 1997).

To the Batmobile!

A

We begin with the question whether the Batmobile, as it
appears in  the  comic  books,  television  series, and  motion
picture, is entitled to copyright protection.  See Ets-Hokin v.

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

11

Skyy Spirits, Inc., 225 F.3d 1068, 1073 (9th Cir. 2000).  In the
context  of  copyright  law,  where,  as  here,  “the  question
requires us to consider legal concepts in the mix of fact and
law and to exercise judgment about the values that animate
legal principles, . . . the question should be classified as one
of law and reviewed de novo.”  Harper House, Inc. v. Thomas
Nelson, Inc., 889 F.2d 197, 201 (9th Cir. 1989).

Courts have recognized that copyright protection extends
not  only  to  an  original  work  as  a  whole,  but  also  to
“sufficiently  distinctive”  elements, 
like  comic  book
characters, contained within the work.  Halicki Films, LLC v.
Sanderson  Sales  &  Mktg.,  547  F.3d  1213,  1224  (9th  Cir.
2008).  Although comic book characters are not listed in the
Copyright Act, we have long held that such characters are
afforded copyright protection.  See Walt Disney Productions
v. Air Pirates, 581 F.2d 751 (9th Cir. 1978).  In Air Pirates,
for instance, we considered a number of subversive comic
books that portrayed well-known Disney characters as being
active  participants  in  “a  free  thinking,  promiscuous,  drug
ingesting counterculture.”  Id. at 753.  In holding that the
Disney  characters  were  copyrightable  (and  that  Disney’s
copyright  in  those  characters  had  been  infringed),  we
distinguished  a  prior  decision  suggesting  that  literary
“characters  ordinarily  are  not  copyrightable,”  id.  at  755
(citing Warner Bros. Pictures, Inc. v. Columbia Broad. Sys.,
Inc., 216 F.2d 945 (9th Cir. 1954)), on the grounds that a
comic  book  character “has physical  as  well  as  conceptual
qualities”  and  “is  more  likely  to  contain  some  unique
elements of expression” than a purely literary character.  Id.5

   5 We later indicated that the analysis in Warner Bros. Pictures, Inc. v.
Columbia Broad Syst., Inc., regarding the noncopyrightability of literary
characters  was  dicta  or  an  alternative  holding.    See  Walt  Disney

12

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

(citing  Detective  Comics,  Inc.  v.  Bruns  Publications  Inc.,
111  F.2d  432  (2d  Cir.  1940)  (holding  that  comic  book
characters  are  copyrightable);  Fleischer  Studios  v.
Freundlich,  73  F.2d  276  (2d  Cir.  1934)  (same);  King
Features Syndicate v. Fleischer, 299 F. 533 (2d Cir. 1924)
(same)).  We subsequently held that characters in a television
series or a motion picture may also be entitled to copyright
protection.  See Olson v. National Broadcasting Co., 855 F.2d
1446 (9th Cir. 1988).

Not  every  comic  book,  television,  or  motion  picture
character is entitled to copyright protection.  We have held
that copyright protection is available only “for characters that
are especially distinctive.”  Halicki, 547 F.3d at 1224.  To
meet  this  standard,  a  character  must  be  “sufficiently
delineated”  and  display  “consistent,  widely  identifiable
traits.”  Rice v. Fox Broadcasting Co., 330 F.3d 1170 (9th
Cir. 2003) (citing Toho Co., Ltd. v. William Morrow & Co.,
Inc., 33 F. Supp. 2d 1206, 1215 (C.D. Cal.1998) (Godzilla)). 
A  masked  magician  “dressed  in  standard  magician  garb”
whose role “is limited to performing and revealing the magic
tricks,” for example, is not “an ‘especially distinct’ character
differing from an ordinary magician in a manner that warrants
copyright protection.”  Id.  Further, characters that have been
“lightly  sketched”  and  lack  descriptions  may  not  merit
copyright protection.  Olson, 855 F.2d at 1452–53.

We  have  previously  determined  that  an  automotive
character  can  be  copyrightable.    See  Halicki,  547  F.3d  at

Productions,  581  F.2d  at  755  n.10;  see  also  Olson  v.  National
Broadcasting Co., 855 F.2d 1446, 1452 n.6 (9th Cir. 1988) (same).

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

13

1224.  In Halicki, we considered whether “Eleanor,” a car
that  appeared  in  both  the  original  1971  and  2000  remake
motion  picture  Gone  in  60  Seconds,  could  be  entitled  to
copyright  protection  as  a  character.    Id.  at  1224–25. 
Considering  Eleanor’s  persistent  attributes  in  both  the
original and remake of Gone in 60 Seconds, we concluded
that Eleanor met some of the key factors necessary to qualify
for copyright protection.  Id. at 1225.  We first noted that
Eleanor was more like a comic book character than a literary
character  given  Eleanor’s  “physical  as  well  as  conceptual
qualities.”    Id.    We  also  stated  that  Eleanor  “displays
consistent,  widely  identifiable  traits  and  is  especially
distinctive.”  Id. (alteration, citation, and internal quotation
marks omitted).  We gave several examples of these traits. 
First, we noted that “[i]n both films, the thefts of the other
cars go largely as planned, but whenever the main human
character  tries  to  steal  Eleanor,  circumstances  invariably
become  complicated.”    Id.    Second,  we  noted  that  in  the
original,  “the  main  character  says  ‘I’m  getting  tired  of
stealing  this  Eleanor  car,’”  and  in  the  remake  “the  main
character refers to his history with Eleanor.”  Id.  Despite this
evidence of distinctive traits, we were sensitive to the fact
that the district court had implied that Eleanor was deserving
of copyright protection, but had not directly examined this
“fact-intensive issue.”  Id.  Therefore, we remanded the issue
to the district court to decide in the first instance.  Id.

As indicated in Halicki, a character may be protectable if
it has distinctive character traits and attributes, even if the
character does not maintain the same physical appearance in
every context.  As the Eighth Circuit has recognized, “the
presence of distinctive qualities apart from visual appearance
can diminish or even negate the need for consistent visual
appearance.”  Warner Bros. Entm’t, Inc. v. X One X Prods.,

14

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

644  F.3d  584,  599  n.8  (8th  Cir.  2011).    For  example,  in
Halicki, Eleanor’s ability to consistently disrupt heists by her
presence was more pertinent to our analysis of whether the
car should qualify as a sufficiently distinctive character than
Eleanor’s  make  and  model.    547  F.3d  at  1225.    Indeed,
Halicki  put  no  weight  on  the  fact  that  Eleanor  was  a
customized yellow 1971 Fastback Ford Mustang in one film,
and a silver 1967 Shelby GT-500 in another.

Similarly,  district  courts  have  determined  that  James
Bond,  Batman,  and  Godzilla  are  characters  protected  by
copyright, despite their changes in appearance.  See Metro-
Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc. v. Am. Honda Motor Co., 900 F. Supp.
1287, 1295–96 (C.D. Cal. 1995) (James Bond) (cited with
approval in Rice); Toho Co. v. William Morrow & Co., 33 F.
Supp. 2d 1206, 1216 (C.D. Cal. 1998) (Godzilla) (cited with
approval  in  Rice);  Sapon  v.  DC  Comics,  No.  00  CIV.
8992(WHP), 2002 WL 485730, at *3–4 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 29,
2002) (Batman).  In each instance, courts have deemed the
persistence of a character’s traits and attributes to be key to
determining  whether  the  character  qualifies  for  copyright
protection.    The  character  “James  Bond”  qualifies  for
copyright protection because, no matter what the actor who
portrays  this  character  looks  like,  James  Bond  always
maintains his “cold-bloodedness; his overt sexuality; his love
of  martinis  ‘shaken,  not  stirred;’  his  marksmanship;  his
‘license to kill’ and use of guns; his physical strength; [and]
his sophistication.”  Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, 900 F. Supp. at
1296.  Similarly, while the character “Godzilla” may have a
different  appearance  from  time  to  time,  it  is  entitled  to
copyright protection because it “is always a pre-historic, fire-
breathing,  gigantic  dinosaur  alive  and  well  in  the  modern
world.”  Toho Co., 33 F. Supp. 2d at 1216.  In short, although
James  Bond’s,  Godzilla’s,  and  Batman’s  “costume  and

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

15

character have evolved over the years, [they have] retained
unique, protectable characteristics” and are therefore entitled
to  copyright  protection  as  characters.    Sapon,  2002  WL
485730, at *3–4.

We read these precedents as establishing a three-part test
for  determining  whether  a  character  in  a  comic  book,
television program, or motion picture is entitled to copyright
protection.  First, the character must generally have “physical
as well as conceptual qualities.”  Air Pirates, 581 F.2d at 755. 
Second, the character must be “sufficiently delineated” to be
recognizable as the same character whenever it appears.  See
Rice, 330 F.3d at 1175.  Considering the character as it has
appeared in different productions, it must display consistent,
identifiable  character  traits  and  attributes,  although  the
character need not have a consistent appearance.  See Halicki,
547 F.3d at 1224.  Third, the character must be “especially
distinctive”  and  “contain  some  unique  elements  of
expression.”  Halicki, 547 F.3d at 1224.  It cannot be a stock
character such as a magician in standard magician garb.  Rice,
330  F.3d  at  1175.    Even  when  a  character  lacks  sentient
attributes  and  does  not  speak  (like  a  car),  it  can  be  a
protectable  character  if  it  meets  this  standard.    Halicki,
547 F.3d at 1224.

We  now  apply  this  framework  to  this  case.    Because
(unlike  in  Halicki)  the  district  court  here  addressed  this
question  in  detail,  we  consider  its  factual  findings  in
analyzing this issue.  Cf. Halicki, 547 F.3d at 1225.  First,
because  the  Batmobile  has  appeared  graphically  in  comic
books, and as a three-dimensional car in television series and
motion  pictures,  it  has  “physical  as  well  as  conceptual
qualities,”  and  is  thus  not  a  mere  literary  character.    Air
Pirates, 581 F.2d at 755.

16

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

Second, the Batmobile is “sufficiently delineated” to be
recognizable as the same character whenever it appears.  See
Rice, 330 F.3d at 1175.  As the district court determined, the
Batmobile has maintained distinct physical and conceptual
qualities since its first appearance in the comic books in 1941. 
In  addition  to  its  status  as  “a  highly-interactive  vehicle,
equipped with high-tech gadgets and weaponry used to aid
Batman in fighting crime,” the Batmobile is almost always
bat-like in appearance, with a bat-themed front end, bat wings
extending  from  the  top  or  back  of  the  car,  exaggerated
fenders, a curved windshield, and bat emblems on the vehicle. 
This  bat-like  appearance  has  been  a  consistent  theme
throughout the comic books, television series, and motion
picture,  even  though  the  precise  nature  of  the  bat-like
characteristics have changed from time to time.

The  Batmobile  also  has  consistent  character traits  and
attributes.  No matter its specific physical appearance, the
Batmobile is a “crime-fighting” car with sleek and powerful
characteristics that allow Batman to maneuver quickly while
he  fights  villains.    In  the  comic  books,  the  Batmobile  is
described as waiting “[l]ike an impatient steed straining at the
reins . . . shiver[ing] as its super-charged motor throbs with
energy” before it “tears after the fleeing hoodlums” an instant
later.  Elsewhere, the Batmobile “leaps away and tears up the
street like a cyclone,” and at one point “twin jets of flame
flash out with thunderclap force, and the miracle car of the
dynamic duo literally flies through the air!”6  Like its comic
book counterpart, the Batmobile depicted in both the 1966
television series and the 1989 motion picture possesses “jet
engine[s]” and flame-shooting tubes that undoubtedly give

   6 This episode causes Robin to exclaim “Whee!  The Batplane couldn’t
do better!”

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

17

the  Batmobile  far  more  power  than  an  ordinary  car. 
Furthermore, the Batmobile has an ability to maneuver that
far exceeds that of an ordinary car.  In the 1966 television
series, the Batmobile can perform an “emergency bat turn”
via  reverse  thrust  rockets.    Likewise,  in  the  1989  motion
picture, the Batmobile can enter “Batmissile” mode, in which
the  Batmobile  sheds  “all  material  outside  [the]  central
fuselage”  and  reconfigures  its  “wheels  and  axles  to  fit
through narrow openings.”7

Equally  important,  the  Batmobile  always  contains  the
most up-to-date weaponry and technology.  At various points
in  the  comic  book,  the  Batmobile  contains  a  “hot-line
phone  .  .  .  directly  to  Commissioner  Gordon’s  office”
maintained  within  the  dashboard  compartment,  a  “special
alarm” that foils the Joker’s attempt to steal the Batmobile,
and even a complete “mobile crime lab” within the vehicle. 
Likewise,  the  Batmobile  in  the  1966  television  series
possesses a “Bing-Bong warning bell,” a mobile Bat-phone,
a “Batscope, complete with [a] TV-like viewing screen on the
dash,” and a “Bat-ray.”  Similarly, the Batmobile in the 1989
motion  picture is equipped with a “pair of forward-facing
Browning  machine  guns,”  “spherical  bombs,”  “chassis-
mounted shinbreakers,” and “side-mounted disc launchers.”

Because the Batmobile, as it appears in the comic books
as  well  as  in  the  1966  television  show  and  1989  motion
picture, displays “consistent, identifiable character traits and
attributes,” the second prong of the character analysis is met
here.

   7 Towle submitted a chart to the district court setting forth these features.

18

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

Third,  the  Batmobile  is  “especially  distinctive”  and
contains unique elements of expression.  In addition to its
status as Batman’s loyal bat-themed sidekick complete with
the  character  traits  and  physical  characteristics  described
above,  the  Batmobile  also  has  its  unique  and  highly
recognizable name.  It is not merely a stock character.

Accordingly, applying our three-part test, we conclude
that the Batmobile is a character that qualifies for copyright
protection.

Towle  raises  two  arguments  against  this  conclusion. 
First, he points out that the Batmobile has at times appeared
without its signature sleek “bat-like” features.  He notes that
in a 1988 comic book rendition, the Batmobile appears as a
heavily armored tank with large tires and a rocket launcher. 
The Batmobile portrayed in the 1989 motion picture could
also transform into a Batmissile.  As we have noted, however,
a consistent appearance is not as significant in our analysis as
consistent  character  traits  and  attributes.    The  changes  in
appearance cited by Towle resemble costume changes that do
not alter the Batmobile’s innate characteristics, any more than
James Bond’s change from blue swimming trunks (in Casino
Royale) to his classic tuxedo affects his iconic character.  In
context, the depictions of the Batmobile as a tank or missile
promote its character as Batman’s crime-fighting super car
that can adapt to new situations as may be necessary to help
Batman vanquish Gotham City’s most notorious evildoers. 
See Halicki, 547 F.3d at 1224–25.

Second,  Towle  argues  that  a  jury  should  decide  the
question whether the Batmobile displayed unique elements of
expression  and  consistent,  widely  identifiable  traits.    We
disagree.  We have previously recognized that “[w]hether a

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

19

particular work is subject to copyright protection is a mixed
question of fact and law subject to de novo review.”  Societe
Civile Succession Guino v. Renoir, 549 F.3d 1182, 1185 (9th
Cir. 2008).  Neither party disputes the relevant facts regarding
the Batmobile here.  Accordingly, we are well-equipped to
determine whether, as a matter of law, these undisputed facts
establish  that  the  Batmobile  is  an  “especially  distinctive”
character entitled to copyright protection.

B

Having concluded that the Batmobile is a copyrightable
character, we next consider whether Towle’s copies of the
Batmobile as it appeared in the 1966 and 1989 productions
infringed on DC’s copyright.  Here, Towle does not contest
that his replicas copy the Batmobile as it appeared in the 1966
and 1989 productions, even if they do not copy every feature. 
Rather, Towle’s main argument is that DC does not own any
copyright  interest  in  the  1966  and  1989  productions  and
therefore lacks standing to pursue its copyright infringement
claim against Towle.

To  analyze  Towle’s  argument,  we  begin  with  the
applicable  legal  framework.    Under  the  Copyright  Act,
“copyright ownership ‘vests initially in the author or authors
of the work,’ which is generally the creator of the copyrighted
work.”  U.S. Auto Parts Network, Inc. v. Parts Geek, LLC,
692  F.3d  1009,  1015  (9th  Cir.  2012)  (quoting  17  U.S.C.
§  201(a)).    The  owner  of  a  copyright  has  a  number  of
exclusive rights, including the right “to prepare derivative
works” based on its original work of authorship, 17 U.S.C.
§ 106.  A derivative work is a “work based upon one or more
preexisting  works  that  recasts,  transforms,  or  adapts  the
preexisting  work,”  Parts  Geek,  692  F.3d  at  1015–16

20

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

(alterations omitted) (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 101), such as a
motion  picture  that  is  based  on  a  literary  work,  see,  e.g.,
Stewart  v.  Abend,  495  U.S.  207,  212–14  (1990),  a  three-
dimensional costume based upon two-dimensional cartoon
characters, see Entm’t Research Grp., 122 F.3d at 1218, or
three-dimensional  figurines  based  on  cartoon  characters,
Durham Indus., Inc. v. Tomy Corp., 630 F.2d 905, 909 (9th
Cir.  1980).    If  an  unauthorized  third  party  prepares  a
derivative work, the copyright owner of the underlying work
can sue for infringement.  See Silvers v. Sony Pictures Entm’t,
Inc.,  402  F.3d  881,  885  (9th  Cir.  2005)  (en  banc)  (citing
17 U.S.C. § 501(b)); see also, e.g., Air Pirates, 581 F.2d at
754–55; Durham Indus., 630 F.2d at 909.

A  copyright  owner  also  has  the  exclusive  right  to
“authorize others to prepare derivative works based on their
copyrighted works.”  Lewis Galoob Toys, Inc. v. Nintendo of
Am.,  Inc.,  964  F.2d  965,  967  (9th  Cir.  1992).    When  a
copyright  owner  authorizes  a  third  party  to  prepare  a
derivative work, the owner of the underlying work retains a
copyright in that derivative work with respect to all of the
elements that the derivative creator drew from the underlying
work  and  employed  in  the  derivative  work.    See  Stewart,
495 U.S. at 223.  By contrast, the creator of the derivative
work has a copyright only as to those original aspects of the
work that the derivative creator contributed, and only to the
extent the derivative creator’s contributions are “more than
trivial.”    Parts  Geek,  692  F.3d  at  1016;  see also  Stewart,
495 U.S. at 223.  Moreover, a copyright in a derivative work
“must  not  in  any  way  affect  the  scope  of  any  copyright
protection in that preexisting material.”  Id.; see 17 U.S.C.
§ 103(a) (“The copyright in a . . . derivative work . . . is
independent  of,  and  does  not  affect  or  enlarge  the  scope,
duration,  ownership,  or  subsistence  of,  any  copyright

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

21

protection in the preexisting material.”).  Logically, therefore,
if a third party copies a derivative work without authorization,
it infringes the original copyright owner’s copyright in the
underlying work to the extent the unauthorized copy of the
derivative work also copies the underlying work.

We reached a similar conclusion in Apple Computer, Inc.
v. Microsoft Corp., 35 F.3d 1435, 1447–48 (9th Cir. 1994). 
There, Apple alleged that Microsoft infringed its copyright in
the graphical user interface called the Lisa Desktop, as well
as  its  copyright  in  a  graphical  user  interface  called  the
Macintosh  Finder  Desktop,  which  was  a  derivative  work
based on the Lisa Desktop.  Id. at 1438 & n.1.  Because the
Finder Desktop did not contain any separately copyrightable
original  elements,  the  district  court  concluded  that  Apple
could  not  bring  a  copyright  infringement  claim  for
Microsoft’s alleged infringement of that work.  Id. at 1447. 
We  reversed,  holding  that  Apple  could  bring  a  copyright
infringement suit  for the alleged copying of both the Lisa
Desktop  and  the  derivative  Finder  Desktop,  because  of
Apple’s copyright in the underlying work.  Id. at 1447–48.  In
reaching  this  conclusion,  we cited  with  approval the  First
Circuit’s conclusion in Gamma Audio & Video that the owner
of an exclusive right in an underlying work could “base [an]
infringement suit on derivative works.”  Id. (citing Gamma
Audio & Video, Inc. v. Ean-Chea, 11 F.3d 1106, 1111–12 (1st
Cir. 1993)).

Our sister circuits also agree with this conclusion.  See,
e.g., Montgomery v. Noga, 168 F.3d 1282, 1293 (11th Cir.
1999);  Gamma  Audio  &  Video,  Inc.,  11  F.3d  1106.    In
Gamma  Audio  &  Video,  the  owner  of  a  copyright  in  a
Chinese language television program had authorized a party
to produce a derivative work, a Cambodian language version

22

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

of the program.  11 F.3d at 1110.  When an unauthorized
third  party  copied  this  Cambodian  language  version  (the
derivative work), the First Circuit concluded that the owner
of  the  copyright  in  the  Chinese  language  version  (the
underlying  work)  could  sue  the  third  party  for  copyright
infringement because “[a]ny elements that the author of the
derivative work borrowed from the underlying work, such as
the video images in the Chinese language episodes . . . remain
protected by the copyrights in the underlying work.”  Id. at
1112.  Accordingly, it was “irrelevant that what was actually
distributed  by  [the  unauthorized  third  party]  was  the
derivative and not the underlying work.”  Id.

In sum, as a leading copyright commentator explained, “if
the  material  copied  was  derived  from  a  copyrighted
underlying work, this will constitute an infringement of such
work  regardless  of  whether  the  defendant  copied  directly
from  the  underlying  work,  or  indirectly  via  the  derivative
work.” 1 Melville B. Nimmer & David Nimmer, Nimmer on
Copyright § 3.05, at 3-34.31 (Matthew Bender, Rev.  Ed.)
(hereafter  Nimmer  on  Copyright).    This  conclusion  is
consistent  with  our  determination  that  a  copyright  in  an
authorized derivative work “must not in any way affect the
scope of any copyright protection in” the underlying work. 
Parts Geek, 692 F.3d at 1016 (quoting Entm’t Research Grp.,
122 F.3d at 1220 (quoting Durham Indus., 630 F.2d at 909)).
Accordingly, the author of an underlying work is entitled to
sue  a  third  party  who  makes  an  unauthorized  copy  of  an
authorized  derivative  work  to  the  extent  that  the  material
copied derived from the underlying work.

Applying these principles, we conclude that DC owns a
copyright interest in the Batmobile character, as it is depicted
in the 1966 and 1989 productions.  There is no dispute that

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

23

DC is the original creator of the Batmobile character.  While
DC  licensed  rights  to  produce  derivative  works  of  this
character  in  the  1965  ABC  Agreement  and  the  1979  BPI
Agreement, DC did not transfer its underlying rights to the
Batmobile character.8  DC therefore owns the copyright in the
Batmobile  character,  as  expressed  in  the  1966  and  1989
productions, at least to the extent these productions drew on
DC’s  underlying  work. 
  Stewart,  495  U.S.  at  223. 
Accordingly, it is irrelevant that Towle’s replica Batmobiles
were an indirect copy of the Batmobile character, because DC
is entitled to sue for infringement of its underlying work.9 
See Apple  Computer,  35  F.3d  1447–48;  Gamma  Audio  &
Video, 11 F.3d at 1111–12.

   8 Indeed, DC expressly retained all rights not specifically granted to the
licensees, including the merchandising rights to all of if its characters in
both the 1965 ABC Agreement and the 1979 BPI Agreement.  See supra,
at 5, 6.  As a result, DC retained the exclusive right to produce three-
dimensional expressions of the Batmobile character.  See Durham Indus.,
630 F.2d at 909; see also Halicki, 547 F.3d at 1218, 1223–24 (concluding
that  because  a  party  retained  the  exclusive  merchandising  rights  in  a
derivative  work,  she  could  assert  a  claim  for  copyright  infringement
against a party producing “vehicles resembling the 1967 Shelby GT-500
‘Eleanor’ character that appeared in the Remake” Gone in Sixty Seconds).

      9  Because  DC  retains  its  copyright  in  the  underlying  Batmobile
character,  we  also  reject  Towle’s  argument  that  the  version  of  the
Batmobile that appeared in the 1966 and 1989 productions cannot be
copyrighted because the third party producers of these vehicles obtained
a design patent on these works.  These creators could obtain protection
only for the original, independently copyrightable aspects of their work. 
Parts Geek, 692 F.3d at 1016.  In any event, parties may now obtain both
a design patent and a copyright in a work.  See Registrability of Pictorial,
Graphic, or Sculptural Works Where a Design Patent Has Been Issued,
60 Fed. Reg. 15605-01, 15605 (March 24, 1995).  

24

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

Towle  argues  that  his  replicas  of  the  Batmobile  as  it
appeared in the 1966 and 1989 productions do not infringe on
DC’s  underlying  work  because  those  versions  of  the
Batmobile  look  substantially  different  from  any  particular
depiction of the Batmobile in the comic books.  We reject this
argument.  As a copyrightable character, the Batmobile need
not have a consistent appearance in every context, so long as
the character has distinctive character traits and attributes. 
See, e.g., Warner Bros. Entm’t, Inc., 644 F.3d at 599 n.8.  For
instance, as we explained above, an automotive character may
be copyrightable even if it appears as a yellow Fastback Ford
Mustang in one film, and a silver 1967 Shelby GT-500 in
another.  Halicki, 547 F.3d at 1218, 1224.  Here, DC retained
its  copyright  in  the  Batmobile  character  even  though  its
appearance in the 1966 and 1989 productions did not directly
copy any comic book depiction.  Because Towle produced a
three-dimensional  expression  of  the  entire  Batmobile
character as it appeared in the 1966 and 1989 productions,
and the Batmobile character in each of those productions was
derived  from  DC’s  underlying  work,  we  conclude  that
Towle’s replicas necessarily copied some aspects of DC’s
underlying works.  See e.g., Durham Indus., 630 F.2d at 909
(noting that three-dimensional “small, plastic, wind-up toys”
of  Disney  characters  Mickey,  Donald,  and  Pluto  were
derivative works of these characters).  Therefore, while we
question  whether  a  derivative  work  based  on  a  character
could ever have any independently copyrightable elements
that would not “affect the scope of any copyright protection
in that preexisting material,” Parts Geek, 692 F.3d at 1016,
we need not address that issue here.

For the same reason, we reject Towle’s argument that his
replicas of the Batmobile as it appeared in the 1966 television
series and 1989 movie did not infringe DC’s underlying work

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

25

because the series and movies were produced by third parties,
pursuant  to  sub-licensing  agreements  with  ABC  and  BPI. 
Towle argues that while DC had an agreement with ABC and
BPI  to  retain  certain  rights,  DC  failed  to  show  that  the
agreements between ABC and BPI and the sublicensees also
protected DC’s interests.  This argument fails because DC
retained its rights to the underlying Batmobile character, and
the  creation  of  derivative  works  by  sublicensees  cannot
deprive DC of such rights.  DC may sue any third party who
infringes  on  that  work,  even  if  the  third  party  copies
“indirectly via the derivative work.”  Nimmer on Copyright
§ 3.05.

C

Having established that the Batmobile character is entitled
to copyright protection, and that DC owns a copyright to this
character as it appears in the 1966 television series and 1989
motion picture, we conclude that Towle infringed upon these
copyrights  when  he  produced  replicas  of  the  Batmobile. 
While we ordinarily apply a two-part “substantial similarity”
test to determine whether a plaintiff has established “copying
of constituent elements of the work that are original,” Funky
Films, Inc. v. Time Warner Entm’t Co., L.P., 462 F.3d 1072,
1076–77 (9th Cir. 2006) (internal quotation marks omitted),
we  need  not  do  so  where,  as  here,  “the  copying  of  the
substance of the entire work” is admitted, Narell v. Freeman,
872 F.2d 907, 910 (9th Cir. 1989).  Based on the undisputed
facts,  Towle’s  production  and  sale  of  replicas  of  the
Batmobile, as it appeared in the 1966 and 1989 productions,
infringed DC’s exclusive right to produce derivative works of
this  character.    Therefore,  there  is  no  genuine  issue  of
material fact as to whether he infringed DC’s copyrighted
material.  DC is entitled to judgment, and we affirm.

26

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

III

Finally,  we  must  consider  Towle’s  argument  that  the
district court erred when it ruled as a matter of law that he
could  not  assert  a  laches  defense  to  DC’s  trademark
infringement  claim  because  he  willfully  infringed  DC’s
trademarks.    We  have  recognized  an  intracircuit  split  on
whether the proper standard of review of a district court’s
laches determination is de novo or for an abuse of discretion. 
See Jarrow Formulas, Inc. v. Nutrition Now, Inc., 304 F.3d
829, 834 (9th Cir. 2002).  We need not address this issue in
this case, however, because under either standard of review,
the district court did not err here.  See id.

“Laches is an equitable time limitation on a party’s right
to  bring  suit,”  and  is  a  valid  defense  to  trademark
infringement  claims.    Jarrow,  304  F.3d  at  835  (internal
quotation  marks  omitted).    This  doctrine  does  not  apply,
however, “in cases of willful infringement.” Evergreen Safety
Council v. RSA Network, Inc., 697 F.3d 1221, 1228 (9th Cir.
2012).    Willful  trademark  infringement  occurs  when  the
defendant’s actions are “willfully calculated to exploit the
advantage of an established mark.”  Lindy Pen Co., Inc. v. Bic
Pen  Corp., 982 F.2d 1400, 1406 (9th Cir. 1993) (internal
quotation  marks  omitted),  superseded  by  statute  on  other
grounds, Trademark Amendments Act of 1999, Pub. L. No.
106-43, 113 Stat. 218; see also Conan Props., Inc. v. Conans
Pizza, Inc., 752 F.2d 145, 151 n.2 (5th Cir. 1985) (explaining
that  the  issue  with  respect  to  the  availability  of  a  laches
defense  in  a  trademark  infringement  case  is  whether  the
defendant “intended to derive benefit from and capitalize on
[the plaintiff’s] goodwill” by using the mark).

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

27

Here, the undisputed facts establish that Towle used DC’s
Batman trademarks in order to exploit the advantage of those
marks.  Towle’s advertisements recognize that the Batmobile
is a famous vehicle, and boast that crowds will form around
his replicas as a result of the Batmobile’s fame.  Additionally,
Towle used DC’s trademarks on his website to promote his
business.    He  also  intentionally  referred to  his  replicas as
“Batmobiles” to attract the attention of the Batman fans who
constitute  his  customer  base.    Indeed,  by  Towle’s  own
admission,  most of his customers were fans who “usually
know the entire history of the Batmobile.”  In light of this
evidence, no reasonable juror could conclude that Towle used
DC’s  trademarks  for  any  reason  other  than  to  exploit  the
advantage of those marks.

Indeed, Towle does not argue otherwise, instead arguing
that he did not knowingly and subjectively intend to confuse
his buyers.  Although evidence of intent to confuse buyers
may be relevant to establishing that the defendant’s actions
were  willfully  calculated  to  exploit  the  advantage  of  an
established mark, Towle points to no authority holding that
such evidence is necessary, nor is the court aware of any such
authority.  Accordingly, the district court did not err when it
concluded  that  Towle  was  barred  from  asserting  a  laches
defense to DC’s trademark infringement claim because he
willfully infringed DC’s trademarks.

IV

As Batman so sagely told Robin, “In our well-ordered
society, protection of private property is essential.”  Batman:
The  Penguin  Goes  Straight,  (Greenway  Productions
television broadcast March 23, 1966).  Here, we conclude that
the Batmobile character is the property of DC, and Towle

28

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

infringed  upon  DC’s  property  rights  when  he  produced
unauthorized derivative works of the Batmobile as it appeared
in the 1966 television show and the 1989 motion  picture. 
Accordingly, we affirm the district court.

AFFIRMED.

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

29

APPENDIX A

Batmobile Depicted in the 1966 Television Series

Towle Replica

30

DC COMICS V. TOWLE

APPENDIX B

Batmobile Depicted in the 1989 Motion Picture

Towle Replica

