Historic Day at Bar - Dodger Stays in Brooklyn - Judge Says, Among …ings, That Los Angeles Club Has No Good Name to Lose - NYTimes.com

5/7/17, 4:05 PM

HOME PAGE

TODAY'S PAPER

VIDEO MOST POPULAR

U.S. Edition

N.Y. / Region

Log In   Register Now   Help

Search All NYTimes.com

 

WORLD

U.S. N.Y. / REGION BUSINESS

TECHNOLOGY

SCIENCE

HEALTH

SPORTS

OPINION

ARTS

STYLE

TRAVEL

JOBS REAL ESTATE AUTOS

Historic Day at Bar: Dodger Stays in Brooklyn; Judge
Says, Among Other Things, That Los Angeles Club Has
No Good Name to Lose

By DOUGLAS MARTIN
Published: April 9, 1993

Nothing can heal the wound left when the Brooklyn Dodgers packed
up their bats and balls and headed to Los Angeles after the 1957
season. But yesterday, Brooklyn got a small measure of revenge.

A Federal judge in Manhattan ruled that the Brooklyn Dodger Sports
Bar and Restaurant could keep its name in the face of a legal effort by
the Los Angeles Dodger organization to take even that shred of
identity away from Brooklyn.

FACEBOOK

TWITTER

GOOGLE+

EMAIL

SHARE

PRINT

"It's a great day for Brooklyn," said Richard Picardi, an owner of the
bar at 7509 Third Avenue in Bay Ridge. "Sometimes the little guy
does win after all."

REPRINTS

MOST EMAILED

RECOMMENDED FOR YOU

1. Results of the French Presidential Election

At the Brooklyn Dodger -- a medium-size bar decorated with Dodger memorabilia,
including one of Jackie Robinson's bats -- emotions yesterday evening ranged from
exhilaration to smugness. But just beneath the surface, the pain of "dem bums' " departure
still seemed to sting. 'To the Third Generation'

"We were all hurt when they moved," said Frank Baratta, 55, a chauffeur who donated $50
to fight the case. "The name of this bar is very special."

"There's no reason why they should have the name," said George Mullaney, a bartender.
"They left here."

The judge, Constance Baker Motley, agreed.

"Defendants testified that many of the patrons who frequent the Brooklyn Dodger are well
aware of Los Angeles's now-infamous abandonment of the borough of Brooklyn and -- to
the third generation since then -- remain bitter about it," she said in her ruling.

Judge Motley found that the Los Angeles Dodgers had made no effort for a quarter-
century to protect the Brooklyn name, and added that the Brooklyn bar owners had
promptly told the Califonia club they were using the name. Loss of What Good Name?

2. 2017 Kentucky Derby Contenders: The

Experts Make Their Picks

3. Police Officer Who Fatally Shot 15-Year-Old

Texas Boy Is Charged With Murder

4. France Chooses a Leader, and Takes a Step

Into the Unknown

5. Macron Campaign Says It Was Target of

‘Massive’ Hacking Attack

6. Warren Buffett, at Berkshire Meeting,
Condemns Republican Health Care Bill

7. The French Election: Join Our Reporters

for Live Analysis

8. Judy Woodruff, the Woman of the Hour

She noted that the club, in conjunction with Major League Baseball Properties Inc., the big
leagues' umbrella business group, waited 18 months after the notification before suing.

9. In Rare Unity, Hospitals, Doctors and

Insurers Criticize Health Bill

Any suggestion that they might have been trying to profit from the good name of the Los
Angeles club was ludicrous, she concluded.

10. U.S. Far-Right Activists Promote Hacking

Attack Against Macron

"Trading upon Los Angeles's 'good will' in Brooklyn would have been fatal to defendants
because many Brooklynites despise the Los Angeles Dodgers," she wrote.

Log in to discover more articles
based on what you‘ve read.

Robert Kheel, a lawyer for the Dodgers and the baseball leagues, said the Dodgers

 

What’s This? | Don’t Show

http://www.nytimes.com/1993/04/09/nyregion/historic-day-bar-dodger-stays-brooklyn-judge-says-among-other-things-that-los.html

Page 1 of 3

Historic Day at Bar - Dodger Stays in Brooklyn - Judge Says, Among …ings, That Los Angeles Club Has No Good Name to Lose - NYTimes.com

5/7/17, 4:05 PM

"obviously disapprove and disagree" with the decision, but said no decision had been made
whether to appeal.

The case reflected an effort by the Dodgers and organized baseball to secure the tightest
possible grip on sales of merchandise carrying team logos. That business grew from about
$200 million in sales in 1986 to $2 billion in 1991, according to testimony at the trial.

The Brooklyn bar sells none of this merchandise, and even stopped giving away T-shirts
with its own name after a previous judge in the case suggested such action might be
prudent. It operates under the name only at the Bay Ridge site, although the owners ran
bars under the Brooklyn Dodger name in Canarsie and Kensington that eventually closed.

The Dodgers' lawyer did not dispute Judge Motley's long description of the events leading
to the suit. The bar first wanted to call itself the Ebbets Field Cafe, but a search of titles
found that an establishment in Hicksville, L.I., already used this name. To avoid legal
problems, the Brooklyn Dodger name was chosen -- a name that dates to the 1880's, when
residents of Brooklyn had to dodge trolleys while crossing streets. Trademark Idle for
Decades

A search of trademarks in Washington indicated the name was not being used by anybody.
Ronald Russo, the bar's lawyer, said this cost the Brooklyn Dodger about $500. He said his
client then immediately wrote to Peter O'Malley, president of the Dodgers, to tell him he
was honoring his team and to invite him by whenever he was in town to see the Mets.

The Dodgers then waited some 18 months to sue, a delay Mr. Russo said was crucial in his
side's victory. Another factor was that the Dodgers had let the trademark go totally unused
for nearly a quarter-century. The judge said the club's actions to license it several times in
the mid-1980's were only "a relatively short time prior to the opening" of the bar. Buy Bar
Twice Over

Mr. Russo last night seemed proud, but amazed. He grew up and still lives in in Brooklyn,
though he now travels to Manhattan, where he charges corporate clients $300 an hour. He
estimates he could have bought the bar twice over had he received fees for his legal work
on the case.

When the case started nearly three years ago, Mr. Russo said the Dodgers and the
professional baseball had nine lawyers on hand. "I don't think they ever thought we would
hang on," he said.

The lawyer's immediate plans were to visit a little bar in Brooklyn, perhaps sip a drink, and
"remember when baseball still was a game."

Photo: Richard Picardi, center, a co-owner of the Brooklyn Dodger, celebrating a Federal
judge's decision that the Brooklyn bar can keep its name. With him outside the bar were
two patrons, Tony McComiskey, left, and Kevin O'Neill. (Steve Berman for The New York
Times)

FACEBOOK

TWITTER

GOOGLE+

EMAIL

SHARE

© 2017 The New York Times Company

Site Map

Privacy

Your Ad Choices

Advertise

Terms of Sale

Terms of Service Work With Us RSS Help Contact Us

Site Feedback

http://www.nytimes.com/1993/04/09/nyregion/historic-day-bar-dodger-stays-brooklyn-judge-says-among-other-things-that-los.html

Page 2 of 3

Historic Day at Bar - Dodger Stays in Brooklyn - Judge Says, Among …ings, That Los Angeles Club Has No Good Name to Lose - NYTimes.com

5/7/17, 4:05 PM

http://www.nytimes.com/1993/04/09/nyregion/historic-day-bar-dodger-stays-brooklyn-judge-says-among-other-things-that-los.html

Page 3 of 3

