DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

About

Issues

Updates

Take Action

Donate

 

DRM in Cars Will Drive

Consumers Crazy

BY PARKER HIGGINS NOVEMBER 13, 2013

Forget extra cupholders or power windows: the new

Renault Zoe comes with a "feature" that absolutely

nobody wants. Instead of selling consumers a complete

car that they can use, repair, and upgrade as they see ﬁt,

Renault has opted to lock purchasers into a rental

contract with a battery manufacturer and enforce that

contract with digital rights management (DRM)

restrictions that can remotely prevent the battery from

charging at all.

We've long joined makers and tinkerers in warning that,

as software becomes a part of more and more everyday

devices, DRM and the legal restrictions on

circumventing it will create hurdles to standard repairs

and even operation. In the U.S., a car manufacturer who

had wrapped its onboard software in technical

restrictions could argue that attempts to get around

those are in violation of the Digital Millennium

Copyright Act (DMCA)—speciﬁcally section 1201, the

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 1 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

notorious "anti-circumvention" provisions. These

provisions make it illegal for users to circumvent DRM

or help others do so, even if the purpose is perfectly

legal otherwise.  Similar laws exist around the world,

and are even written into some international trade

agreements—including, according to a recently leaked

draft, the Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership Agreement.

Since the DMCA became law in 1998, Section 1201 has

resulted in countless unintended consequences. It has

chilled innovation, stiﬂed the speech of legitimate

security researchers, and interfered with consumer

rights. Section 1201 came under particular ﬁre this year

because it may prevent consumers from unlocking their

own phones to use with di!erent carriers. After a

broadly popular petition raised the issue, the White

House acknowledged that the restriction is out of line

with common sense.

The problem extends beyond inconvenience. In plenty of

cases, DRM has led to users losing altogether the ability

to watch, listen to, read, or play media that can't be

"authenticated." Video games with online components

now routinely reach an end-of-life period where the

company providing the authentication decides it's no

longer worth it to operate the servers. That raises the

frightening possibility of a company like Renault

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 2 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

deciding that it's not cost-e!ective anymore to verify

new batteries—and leaving car owners high and dry.

And these are all just the problems with the DRM

running as expected. Unfortunately, the intentional

restrictions created by DRM can also create security

vulnerabilities that can be exploited by other bad actors.

The most prominent example may be the "rootkit" that

Sony included on music CDs and which led in some cases

to further malware infection. The stakes may be even

higher when it comes to cars. Security researchers

uncovering security problems in cars already face

restrictions on publishing; that stands to get worse as

DRM enters the picture.

As our friends at iFixit say, if you can't ﬁx it, you don't

own it. Users need the right to repair the things they

buy, and that is incompatible with blanket restrictions

on circumventing DRM.

Copyright maximalists like to point to the 1201 safety

valve—a rulemaking procedure to identify narrow

exemptions. But the process happens every three years

in the Copyright O"ce, and it's pretty dysfunctional: the

exemptions require extensive work, must be justiﬁed

from scratch each time, and have no established appeal

process. Permission to "jailbreak" cars can't even be

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 3 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

considered until 2015, and even if it is granted,

consumers may be wary to invest in a new car if their

right to repair it could be revoked three years later.

There's a better way, but it requires legislation.

Representative Zoe Lofgren and a group of bipartisan

sponsors have proposed the Unlocking Technology Act,

to limit the anti-circumvention provisions to cases

where there is actual infringement. That's a common

sense change that is long overdue.

More fundamentally, though, users must push back on

the creeping imposition of DRM in more and more

places. As EFF Fellow and former sta! member Cory

Doctorow has noted, computers are increasingly devices

that we depend on for our own health and safety. It's

critically important, then, that consumers actually own

our stu!. Stay tuned: We’ll be pushing hard on this issue

on many fronts in the coming year, and we’ll need your

help.

DRM

FAIR USE AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY: DEFENDING

THE BALANCE

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 4 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

DEFEND YOUR RIGHT TO REPAIR!

DMCA

DMCA RULEMAKING

DRM

FAIR USE AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY: DEFENDING

THE BALANCE

DEFEND YOUR RIGHT TO REPAIR!

DMCA

DMCA RULEMAKING

RELATED UPDATES

EFF IN THE NEWS
It's happening! It's happening! W3C erects
DRM as web standard
The World Wide Web Consortium has formally put
forward highly controversial digital rights management
as a new web standard. Dubbed Encrypted Media
Extensions (EME), this anti-piracy mechanism was
crafted by engineers from Google, Microsoft, and Netﬂix,
and has been in development for some time. The DRM is
supposed to thwart...

What's up at the W3C: further reading for Reply All
listeners

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 5 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

 BY CORY DOCTOROW

DEEPLINKS BLOG
The latest episode of the technology podcast Reply All
features an excellent summary of some of the issues with
the World Wide Web Consortium's current project to
create a standard for restricting the use of videos on the
web; we've created this post for people who've just
listened...

 BY CORY DOCTOROW

DEEPLINKS BLOG
Indefensible: The W3C says companies
should get to decide when and how
security researchers reveal defects in
browsers
The World Wide Web Consortium has just signaled its
intention to deliberately create legal jeopardy for security
researchers who reveal defects in its members' products,
unless the security researchers get the approval of its
members prior to revealing the embarrassing mistakes
those members have made in creating their products.
It's...

 BY CORY DOCTOROW

DEEPLINKS BLOG
Won't someone please think of the bikers?
If there's anything more remarkable than the fact that
ﬁve states are debating "Right to Repair" bills that make
it legal for you to ﬁx your own property, it's that these
bills are needed in the ﬁrst place. Can it really be true
that you aren't allowed choose...

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 6 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

 BY CORY DOCTOROW

DEEPLINKS BLOG
The World Wide Web Consortium at a
Crossroads: Arms-Dealers or Standards-
Setters?
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has a hard
decision to make: a coalition including the world's top
research institutions; organizations supporting blind
users on three continents; security ﬁrms; blockchain
startups; browser vendors and user rights groups have
asked it not to hand control over web video to some of...

PRESS RELEASE
EFF to Copyright Office: It’s Time for Real
Reform of DMCA 1201
San Francisco - The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
urged the U.S. Copyright O"ce today to protect the
public’s right to research and repair everything from
phones to refrigerators to tractors, to support the right of
people with print disabilities to convert media into an
accessible format, and to restore users’...

EFF IN THE NEWS
Cory Doctorow Says Fight Against DRM
Laws Is More Important Than His Blogging
Cory Doctorow , the popular science ﬁction author and
journalist blogger, says he will be writing a lot less in
order to focus on his digital activism work in ﬁghting
Digital Rights Management (DRM) laws alongside the
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF). The security of
corporate IT systems is weakened by...

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 7 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

 BY CORYNNE MCSHERRY

DEEPLINKS BLOG
Tell the Copyright Office: Copyright Law
Shouldn't Punish Research and Repair
After eighteen years, we may ﬁnally see real reform to
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act’s unconstitutional
pro-DRM provisions. But we need your help. In enacting
the “anti-circumvention” provisions of the DMCA,
Congress ostensibly intended to stop copyright “pirates”
from defeating DRM and other content access or copy...

 BY CORY DOCTOROW

DEEPLINKS BLOG
Tell HP: Still a long way to go to make up
for breaking our printers
Last Monday, we published our open letter to Hewlett-
Packard CEO Dion Weisler , and more than 10,000 of you
promptly stepped up to sign it , telling the company that
you agree that it is absolutely unacceptable for a company
to send out deceptive "security"...

EFF IN THE NEWS
HP Inc. Apologizes for Move that Blocked
Rival Printer Cartridges
The charge was taken up by the Electronic Freedom
Foundation, a San Francisco-based group that takes
stands against government surveillance and other tech-
policy matters. The group on Monday sent a letter to Dion
Weisler, HP’s chief executive, arguing in part that HP’s

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 8 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

action could cause customers to become wary of...

1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   …   next ›   last »

The leading nonprofit defending digital privacy, free speech, and innovation.

FOLLOW EFF:

CONTACTABOUT ISSUES UPDATESPRESS DONATE

General

Volunteer

Legal

Victories

Security

History

Free
Speech

Privacy

Membership

Press

Creativity
Internships
&
Innovation

Jobs

Blog

Events

Press
Releases

Press
Contact

Press
Materials

Whitepapers

Staff

Transparency

International

Security

Join or Renew
Membership
Online

One-Time
Donation
Online

Shop

Other Ways to
Give

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 9 of 10

DRM in Cars Will Drive Consumers Crazy | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:32 PM

COPYRIGHT (CC BY)

 
PRIVACY POLICY

 

THANKS

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/11/drm-cars-will-drive-consumers-crazy

Page 10 of 10

