[ANALYSIS] Katherine Heigl Duane Reade Lawsuit to Explore Nature of Corporate Tweets | Hollywood Reporter

5/7/17, 3:58 PM

Exec Suite

!

"

APRIL 10, 2014
7:08am PT by Eriq Gardner

Katherine Heigl
Lawsuit to Explore
Nature of Corporate
Tweets (Analysis)

http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/analysis-katherine-heigl-duane-reade-lawsuit-695029

Page 1 of 5

[ANALYSIS] Katherine Heigl Duane Reade Lawsuit to Explore Nature of Corporate Tweets | Hollywood Reporter

5/7/17, 3:58 PM

Katherine Heigl

#   $   %

The actress is suing a drug store
chain for posting pictures of her
carrying its shopping bags.

Katherine Heigl has been out of the limelight of late, but
thanks to a $6 million lawsuit against Duane Reade, she's
primed to deliver a ruling that could impact how businesses
use social media.

STORY: Katherine Heigl CIA Drama Picked Up to Pilot at
NBC

http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/analysis-katherine-heigl-duane-reade-lawsuit-695029

Page 2 of 5

[ANALYSIS] Katherine Heigl Duane Reade Lawsuit to Explore Nature of Corporate Tweets | Hollywood Reporter

5/7/17, 3:58 PM

The actress is upset that the drug store posted on Twitter and
Facebook a paparazzi photo of her carrying the chain's
shopping bags. She's suing in New York federal court with
claims that the defendant has violated the false advertising
provision of the Lanham Act, as well as New York civil rights
statutes protecting use of likenesses for purpose of trade.

Here's a look at the tweet in question:

Love a quick #DuaneReade run? Even @KatieHeigl can’t resist
shopping #NYC's favorite drugstore http://t.co/l4Ge1lEKL9
pic.twitter.com/uGTc3k1Mii

— Duane Reade (@DuaneReade) March 18, 2014

It's likely that as the case proceeds, Duane Reade will put up a
First Amendment defense that will attempt to protect its
social media postings as expressive rather than commercial
speech. Thus, the nature of how corporations tweet will be
subject to a judge's analysis.

On one hand, it's long been acknowledged that professionals
lean on the medium to promote themselves. On the other,
even corporations can sometimes convey newsworthy
information, and as recent Supreme Court rulings have
suggested, they too have First Amendment rights.

PHOTOS: Facebook Turns 10: The Social Network's Most
Popular Stars, Movies and TV Shows

It's not often clear what are the commercial and
noncommercial uses of the Twitter platform.

In Heigl's complaint (read here), she attempts to put Duane
Reade into the realm that's outside the boundaries of free
speech. Her lawyers at Ballard Spahr write:

"Duane Reade's Twitter account normally includes only
occasional Duane Reade products or store premises
photographs displayed as the user scrolls through the Tweet
postings. But among recent photographs, Plaintiﬀs image
stands out as the only celebrity image, thereby designed to
exploit Plaintiﬀs image to suggest false cachet for
Defendant's Twitter page and imply falsely that Plaintiﬀ
endorses Defendant. On information and belief, Defendant
has singled out Plaintiﬀ simply because she happened to be a

http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/analysis-katherine-heigl-duane-reade-lawsuit-695029

Page 3 of 5

[ANALYSIS] Katherine Heigl Duane Reade Lawsuit to Explore Nature of Corporate Tweets | Hollywood Reporter

5/7/17, 3:58 PM

customer on one occasion at a Duane Reade store, and a
photograph of that occasion happened to be included in
reporting on entertainment-industry news."

The commercial or noncommercial aspect of Duane Reade's
tweet won't be the only factor that determines the outcome
of the lawsuit. In a claim under section 43(a) of the Lanham
Act, there's also the issue of how the drug store's followers
will interpret the tweet. Since there appears to be no
question that the tweet was literally true, the case might turn
on whether consumers were instead given the misleading
impression that Heigl had endorsed the drug store.

STORY: From 'Knocked Up' to Nyquil Ads, Can TV Save
Katherine Heigl's Career?

She's certainly not the ﬁrst celebrity to bring a false
advertising claim. For example, Sandra Bullock has been
pursuing companies for advertising a watch as the one used
by the actress in The Blind Side. That case, though, deals with
venues like e-commerce site Amazon.com as well as the
purchase of the Google AdWords term "Bullock" for
promotion. This one inhabits social media where Twitter and
Facebook followers may have diﬀerent interpretations about
what they see. If the case isn't settled, expect surveys to be
done.

There is a potential drawback for Heigl in bringing the lawsuit.
Unlike Bullock, who is a clear A-lister whose recent papers in
arbitration tout how she's "America's sweetheart" with more
positive associations than even Oprah Winfrey, Heigl is a
more controversial actress thanks in part to reported bad
behavior. In recent years, she's struggled to land great acting
jobs, and as a result, there could be an issue arising in court
proceedings about the true worth of her endorsement. If the
case gets far and Duane Reade ﬁnds itself on the hook for its
social media activity, the company could attempt to probe
Heigl's professional career.

And thus, it might not only be a corporation under the
microscope, but the actress' social media imprimatur as well.

Email: Eriq.Gardner@THR.com
Twitter: @eriqgardner

ADVERTISEMENT

http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/analysis-katherine-heigl-duane-reade-lawsuit-695029

Page 4 of 5

[ANALYSIS] Katherine Heigl Duane Reade Lawsuit to Explore Nature of Corporate Tweets | Hollywood Reporter

5/7/17, 3:58 PM

From The Web
"White Oil" Discovery Could Make OPEC Obsolete
Oil & Energy Investor

Sponsored Links 

by Taboola 

 
 

Save $44 On SoClean 2 - The #1 CPAP Sanitizer
Easy Breathe

Here’s Why Guys Are Obsessed With This Underwear…
The Weekly Brief | Mack Weldon

Her Newest Look Is Absolutely Mesmerizing
SB

From the Web

Powered By ZergNet

Why This 'Guardians of the
Galaxy 2' Actor Looks So
Familiar
IMDb.com

Richard Gere's Theory on
Why Hollywood Dumped
Him
Vanityfair.com

Pierce Brosnan on Losing
Wife & Now Daughter to
Ovarian Cancer
Foxnews.com

Kelly Ripa Bafﬂes Michael
Strahan With 'Live' Divorce
Comments
Usmagazine.com

SHOW COMMENTS

http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/analysis-katherine-heigl-duane-reade-lawsuit-695029

Page 5 of 5

