Jeep Hack Shows Why the DMCA Must Get Out of the Way of Vehicle Security Research | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:34 PM

About

Issues

Updates

Take Action

Donate

 

Jeep Hack Shows Why the
DMCA Must Get Out of the

Way of Vehicle Security

Research

NEWS UPDATE BY KIT WALSH JULY 21, 2015

Security researchers Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek

have once again exposed automobile security ﬂaws that

allow attackers to take over a vehicle’s crucial systems.

In their latest work, they learned how an attacker could

remotely control a car over the Internet.

Vehicle manufacturers dismissed prior warnings about

ﬂawed security by claiming [PDF] that the exploits relied

on physical access to the car. But it has long been known

that vehicles’ wireless systems (such as Bluetooth)

contain vulnerabilities that would allow a malicious

hacker to gain access to critical vehicle functions.

Miller and Valasek took it one step further, revealing one

dramatic way that drivers have been left vulnerable in

manufacturers’ race to connect vehicles to the Internet.

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/07/jeep-hack-shows-why-dmca-must-get-out-way-vehicle-security-research

Page 1 of 4

Jeep Hack Shows Why the DMCA Must Get Out of the Way of Vehicle Security Research | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:34 PM

This particular vulnerability relates to Chrysler’s

Uconnect system, but it would be naive to imagine that

no other vehicles have similar vulnerabilities.

One major reason that serious vulnerabilities have gone

undisclosed and unﬁxed is that laws like Section 1201 of

the Digital Millennium Copyright Act chill independent

security research. That’s why we ﬁled for an exemption

to Section 1201 that would speciﬁcally protect security

and safety research on vehicle software from DMCA

liability. The automakers showed up in force to oppose it

(including the “Auto Alliance” trade group, of which Fiat

Chrysler is a member), arguing that there was no need

for independent security research and that they had the

legal right to shut it down – even when researchers only

look at code on vehicles they own. We think Miller,

Valasek, and other researchers have amply shown the

need for independent vehicle security research.

We also asked for a second DMCA exemption for vehicle

software, one that would allow competition in the

vehicle software space (as well as repairs and

customization). If that exemption is granted, an

alternative software provider could enter the market to

secure your vehicle and you might decide you have more

faith in them than in the original manufacturer (or they

might o!er better functionality, or they might protect

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/07/jeep-hack-shows-why-dmca-must-get-out-way-vehicle-security-research

Page 2 of 4

Jeep Hack Shows Why the DMCA Must Get Out of the Way of Vehicle Security Research | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:34 PM

your privacy against invasive data collection by auto

manufacturers). We would at least see the possibility of

competition leading to better practices and spurring

innovation among manufacturers.

The Librarian of Congress will issue a ﬁnal rule this Fall

and we are hopeful that he will grant exemptions that

bring greater legal certainty to important research and

remove Section 1201 as a barrier to innovation,

competition, and user choice.

FAIR USE AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY: DEFENDING

THE BALANCE

DEFEND YOUR RIGHT TO REPAIR!

DMCA

FAIR USE AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY: DEFENDING

THE BALANCE

DEFEND YOUR RIGHT TO REPAIR!

DMCA

The leading nonprofit defending digital privacy, free speech, and innovation.

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/07/jeep-hack-shows-why-dmca-must-get-out-way-vehicle-security-research

Page 3 of 4

Jeep Hack Shows Why the DMCA Must Get Out of the Way of Vehicle Security Research | Electronic Frontier Foundation

5/7/17, 1:34 PM

FOLLOW EFF:

CONTACTABOUT ISSUES UPDATESPRESS DONATE

General

Volunteer

Legal

Victories

Security

History

Free
Speech

Privacy

Membership

Press

Creativity
Internships
&
Innovation

Jobs

Blog

Events

Press
Releases

Press
Contact

Press
Materials

Whitepapers

Staff

Transparency

International

Security

Join or Renew
Membership
Online

One-Time
Donation
Online

Shop

Other Ways to
Give

COPYRIGHT (CC BY)

 
PRIVACY POLICY

 

THANKS

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/07/jeep-hack-shows-why-dmca-must-get-out-way-vehicle-security-research

Page 4 of 4

