Keurig’s My K-Cup Retreat Shows We Can Beat DRM | WIRED

5/7/17, 1:34 PM

BRIAN BARRETT  GEAR  05.08.15  9:15 AM

KEURIG’S MY K-CUP RETREAT SHOWS
WE CAN BEAT DRM

SHARE

SHARE
1045

TWEET

COMMENT
86

EMAIL

 ARIEL ZAMBELICH/WIRED

IT TAKES A big company to admit that it’s wrong. Well, that and big losses, if
Keurig Green Mountain is a reliable guide. A brutal earnings period, in the
wake of a crackdown on what types of coffee could go into its single-serve

https://www.wired.com/2015/05/keurig-k-cup-drm/

Page 1 of 4

Keurig’s My K-Cup Retreat Shows We Can Beat DRM | WIRED

5/7/17, 1:34 PM

coffee machines, has forced the wold’s largest pusher of pod-based java to do
the unthinkable, or at the very least unlikely: It’s walking back a major part of
its controversial DRM strategy.

The Keurig saga has been, well, brewing since as early as September 2012,
when the expiration of several critical patents left the coffee company
vulnerable to knock-offs of its popular K-Cup, the small, plastic pouch that
houses your morning grinds. Suddenly, instead of controlling every aspect of
your morning caffeine fix short of your mug, Keurig was beset on all sides by
more affordable, unlicensed alternatives. Rather than simply compete on
cost, quality, and convenience—the way most products have to—Keurig’s
masters found a technologically tricky way to freeze everyone else out.

Keurig 2.0 machines, introduced last August, would only accept K-Cups
imprinted with “interactive technology” that indicated they were supplied by
Keurig Green Mountain itself or one of its many licensees. More affordable
pods—and even official pods left over from the first-generation machines—
simply wouldn’t work. Crucially, along with the transition, Keurig killed off
its My K-Cup product, a reusable pod that could be filled with the coffee
grounds of one’s choosing, regardless of the source.

The move toward DRM was supposed to replicate the printer-and-ink model
that served companies like HP and Lexmark so well for so many decades. But
coffee, even in pod form, is both deeply personal and broadly commoditized.
A coffee maker limiting your choice of grind seems as out of place as a frying
pan dictating your eggs.

“Unfortunately, people are used to their computers telling them ‘I’m sorry
you can’t do that,'” explains Mitch Stoltz, staff attorney for the Electronic
Frontier Foundation. “But when it’s your coffee maker or your car saying ‘I’m
sorry you can’t do that,’ that strikes people as very strange.”

Strange and, in this case, worth fighting. The response was swift, aggrieved,
and multi-pronged. Keurig’s Facebook page was flooded with complaints.
Amazon reviewers were livid. The company faced over a dozen lawsuits from
both individuals and rival corporations that charged exclusionary and
anticompetitive behavior. And perhaps most creatively, the Rogers Family
Company created (and gave away gratis) the “Freedom Clip,” an attachment
that renders Keurig’s DRM attempts impotent.

https://www.wired.com/2015/05/keurig-k-cup-drm/

Page 2 of 4

Keurig’s My K-Cup Retreat Shows We Can Beat DRM | WIRED

5/7/17, 1:34 PM

The one retaliation that seemed to effect change most efficiently, though,
was financial. Keurig machine and accessory sales plummeted 23 percent in
the first quarter, year over year, thanks in large part to unease over Keurig
2.0.

To help reverse course, Keurig CEO Brian Kelley this week announced the
return of My K-Cup. It’s welcome news for those who dislike needlessly
tossing hundreds of small plastic containers into the trash every year, but
love freedom of choice and competitive business practices.

“Quite honestly, we were wrong,” explained Kelley on a call with analysts to
discuss earnings this week. “We underestimated the passion that consumer
had for this… We shouldn’t have taken it away.”

The victory’s not quite complete; the My K-Cup won’t be back on the market
until this holiday season, and Kelley made an effort to downplay its
significance in the same breaths with which he announced its return. “It was
a nice convenience for our very, very loyal and heavy user,” Kelley said. “They
didn’t use it frequently, but they used it,” making the My K-Cup sound more
like an old box of Q-Tips than an integral part of one’s morning routine.

The deeper issue of Keurig 2.0 DRM remains as well. While Keurig
spokesperson Kate Binette told WIRED that the company offers an
impressive 500 varieties from over 70 brands—including 25 new additions in
the last year—its machines are still only capable of working with pods from
“partners in the system,” as Binette calls them.

But while Keurig owners still have limited pod choices—absent a Freedom
Clip, that is—their hot water machines will once again play nice with their
preferred roasted beans. Even more importantly, consumer advocacy has
won an important victory against the increasing creep of DRM into the
physical world.

“Ultimately if you sell consumer goods and your customers are saying loudly
that they don’t like something, it’d be suicidal to ignore that,” says Stoltz. “I
absolutely think others will take note of that, and maybe begin to see these
DRM strategies as something that consumers dislike.” According to Stoltz,
those ripple effects won’t be limited to things you buy off a shelf. “It leads to
the realization that consumers don’t have to stand for those sorts of
restrictions, whether they are in hardware or software.”

https://www.wired.com/2015/05/keurig-k-cup-drm/

Page 3 of 4

Keurig’s My K-Cup Retreat Shows We Can Beat DRM | WIRED

5/7/17, 1:34 PM

Even Keurig’s remaining DRM isn’t as onerous as it could be; as Stoltz notes,
they haven’t yet tried to enforce it in court, letting the Freedom Clip and
other workarounds propagate freely. That’s in stark contrast to a company
like Lexmark, which seems intent on suing every aftermarket printer
cartridge company in the phone book.

Keurig’s retreat likely isn’t a harbinger of slackening DRM policies across all
industries. But it does show that if enough people loudly make their case,
progress is possible, even if it’s just one cup’s worth.

https://www.wired.com/2015/05/keurig-k-cup-drm/

Page 4 of 4

