PUBLISHED

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS

FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT





No. 06-2267

 
LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER S.A.,

Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.

HAUTE DIGGITY DOG, LLC; VICTORIA
D.N. DAUERNHEIM; WOOFIES, LLC,
d/b/a Woofie’s Pet Boutique,

Defendant-Appellees.

INTERNATIONAL TRADEMARK
ASSOCIATION,

Amicus Supporting Appellant. 

for the Eastern District of Virginia, at Alexandria.

Appeal from the United States District Court
James C. Cacheris, Senior District Judge.

(1:06-cv-00321-JCC)

Argued: September 26, 2007
Decided: November 13, 2007

Before NIEMEYER and TRAXLER, Circuit Judges, and
Samuel G. WILSON, United States District Judge for the

Western District of Virginia, sitting by designation.

Affirmed by published opinion. Judge Niemeyer wrote the opinion,
in which Judge Traxler and Judge Wilson joined. 

2

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

COUNSEL

ARGUED:  David  Hal  Bernstein,  DEBEVOISE  &  PLIMPTON,
L.L.P.,  New  York,  New  York,  for  Amicus  Supporting  Appellant.
Michael Abbott Grow, ARENT & FOX, P.L.L.C., Washington, D.C.,
for Appellant. James D. Petruzzi, MASON & PETRUZZI, Houston,
Texas,  for  Appellees.  ON  BRIEF:  Savalle  C.  Sims,  Ross  Panko,
ARENT  &  FOX,  P.L.L.C.,  Washington,  D.C.,  for  Appellant.  W.
Michael  Holm,  WOMBLE,  CARLYLE,  SANDRIDGE  &  RICE,
Tyson’s Corner, Virginia, for Appellees. Theodore H. Davis, Jr., Scot
A.  Duvall,  Anne  Gundelfinger,  Steven  Pokotilow,  INTERNA-
TIONAL  TRADEMARK  ASSOCIATION,  New  York,  New  York;
Michael Potenza, Timothy T. Howard, DEBEVOISE & PLIMPTON,
L.L.P., New York, New York, for Amicus Supporting Appellant.

OPINION

NIEMEYER, Circuit Judge: 

Louis Vuitton Malletier S.A., a French corporation located in Paris,
that  manufactures  luxury  luggage,  handbags,  and  accessories,  com-
menced this action against Haute Diggity Dog, LLC, a Nevada corpo-
ration  that  manufactures  and  sells  pet  products  nationally,  alleging
trademark infringement under 15 U.S.C. § 1114(1)(a), trademark dilu-
tion  under  15  U.S.C.  § 1125(c),  copyright  infringement  under  17
U.S.C. § 501, and related statutory and common law violations. Haute
Diggity Dog manufactures, among other things, plush toys on which
dogs can chew, which, it claims, parody famous trademarks on luxury
products, including those of Louis Vuitton Malletier. The particular
Haute Diggity Dog chew toys in question here are small imitations of
handbags  that  are  labeled  "Chewy  Vuiton"  and  that  mimic  Louis
Vuitton Malletier’s LOUIS VUITTON handbags. 

On  cross-motions  for  summary  judgment,  the  district  court  con-
cluded that Haute Diggity Dog’s "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys were suc-
cessful parodies of Louis Vuitton Malletier’s trademarks, designs, and
products, and on that basis, entered judgment in favor of Haute Dig-
gity Dog on all of Louis Vuitton Malletier’s claims. 

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

3
On  appeal,  we  agree  with  the  district  court  that  Haute  Diggity
Dog’s products are not likely to cause confusion with those of Louis
Vuitton  Malletier  and  that  Louis  Vuitton  Malletier’s  copyright  was
not infringed. On the trademark dilution claim, however, we reject the
district court’s reasoning but reach the same conclusion through a dif-
ferent analysis. Accordingly, we affirm. 

I

Louis Vuitton Malletier S.A. ("LVM") is a well known manufac-
turer  of  luxury  luggage,  leather  goods,  handbags,  and  accessories,
which it markets and sells worldwide. In connection with the sale of
its products, LVM has adopted trademarks and trade dress that are
well  recognized  and  have  become  famous  and  distinct.  Indeed,  in
2006,  BusinessWeek  ranked  LOUIS  VUITTON  as  the  17th  "best
brand" of all corporations in the world and the first "best brand" for
any fashion business. 

LVM has registered trademarks for "LOUIS VUITTON," in con-
nection with luggage and ladies’ handbags (the "LOUIS VUITTON
mark"); for a stylized monogram of "LV," in connection with travel-
ing bags and other goods (the "LV mark"); and for a monogram can-
vas  design  consisting  of  a  canvas  with  repetitions  of  the  LV  mark
along with four-pointed stars, four-pointed stars inset in curved dia-
monds, and four-pointed flowers inset in circles, in connection with
traveling bags and other products (the "Monogram Canvas mark"). In
2002,  LVM  adopted  a  brightly-colored  version  of  the  Monogram
Canvas mark in which the LV mark and the designs were of various
colors and the background was white (the "Multicolor design"), cre-
ated in collaboration with Japanese artist Takashi Murakami. For the
Multicolor design, LVM obtained a copyright in 2004. In 2005, LVM
adopted another design consisting of a canvas with repetitions of the
LV mark and smiling cherries on a brown background (the "Cherry
design"). 

As LVM points out, the Multicolor design and the Cherry design
attracted immediate and extraordinary media attention and publicity
in magazines such as Vogue, W, Elle, Harper’s Bazaar, Us Weekly,
Life and Style, Travel & Leisure, People, In Style, and Jane. The press
published photographs showing celebrities carrying these handbags,

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

4
including Jennifer Lopez, Madonna, Eve, Elizabeth Hurley, Carmen
Electra, and Anna Kournikova, among others. When the Multicolor
design first appeared in 2003, the magazines typically reported, "The
Murakami designs for Louis Vuitton, which were the hit of the sum-
mer, came with hefty price tags and a long waiting list." People Mag-
azine said, "the wait list is in the thousands." The handbags retailed
in the range of $995 for a medium handbag to $4500 for a large travel
bag. The medium size handbag that appears to be the model for the
"Chewy  Vuiton"  dog  toy  retailed  for  $1190.  The  Cherry  design
appeared in 2005, and the handbags including that design were priced
similarly — in the range of $995 to $2740. LVM does not currently
market products using the Cherry design. 

The  original  LOUIS  VUITTON,  LV,  and  Monogram  Canvas
marks, however, have been used as identifiers of LVM products con-
tinuously since 1896. 

During the period 2003-2005, LVM spent more than $48 million
advertising products using its marks and designs, including more than
$4 million for the Multicolor design. It sells its products exclusively
in LVM stores and in its own in-store boutiques that are contained
within department stores such as Saks Fifth Avenue, Bloomingdale’s,
Neiman Marcus, and Macy’s. LVM also advertises its products on the
Internet  through  the  specific  websites  www.louisvuitton.com  and
www.eluxury.com. 

Although better known for its handbags and luggage, LVM also
markets  a  limited  selection  of  luxury  pet  accessories  —  collars,
leashes, and dog carriers — which bear the Monogram Canvas mark
and the Multicolor design. These items range in price from approxi-
mately $200 to $1600. LVM does not make dog toys. 

Haute Diggity Dog, LLC, which is a relatively small and relatively
new business located in Nevada, manufactures and sells nationally —
primarily  through  pet  stores  —  a  line  of  pet  chew  toys  and  beds
whose names parody elegant high-end brands of products such as per-
fume, cars, shoes, sparkling wine, and handbags. These include — in
addition  to  Chewy  Vuiton  (LOUIS  VUITTON)  —  Chewnel  No.  5
(Chanel No. 5), Furcedes (Mercedes), Jimmy Chew (Jimmy Choo),
Dog Perignonn (Dom Perignon), Sniffany & Co. (Tiffany & Co.), and

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

5
Dogior (Dior). The chew toys and pet beds are plush, made of polyes-
ter,  and  have  a  shape  and  design  that  loosely  imitate  the  signature
product of the targeted brand. They are mostly distributed and sold
through pet stores, although one or two Macy’s stores carries Haute
Diggity Dog’s products. The dog toys are generally sold for less than
$20, although larger versions of some of Haute Diggity Dog’s plush
dog beds sell for more than $100. 

Haute  Diggity  Dog’s  "Chewy  Vuiton"  dog  toys,  in  particular,
loosely resemble miniature handbags and undisputedly evoke LVM
handbags of similar shape, design, and color. In lieu of the LOUIS
VUITTON mark, the dog toy uses "Chewy Vuiton"; in lieu of the LV
mark, it uses "CV"; and the other symbols and colors employed are
imitations, but not exact ones, of those used in the LVM Multicolor
and Cherry designs.

In 2002, LVM commenced this action, naming as defendants Haute
Diggity  Dog;  Victoria  D.N.  Dauernheim,  the  principal  owner  of
Haute Diggity Dog; and Woofies, LLC, a retailer of Haute Diggity
Dog’s  products,  located  in  Asburn,  Virginia,  for  trademark,  trade
dress, and copyright infringement. Its complaint includes counts for
trademark  counterfeiting,  under  15  U.S.C.  § 1114(1)(a);  trademark
infringement, under 15 U.S.C. § 1114(1)(a); trade dress infringement,
under  15  U.S.C.  § 1125(a)(1);  unfair  competition,  under  15  U.S.C.
§ 1125(a)(1);  trademark  dilution,  under  15  U.S.C.  § 1125(c);  trade-
mark infringement, under Virginia common law; trade dress infringe-
ment, under Virginia common law; unfair competition, under Virginia
common law; copyright infringement of the Multicolor design, under
17 U.S.C. § 501; and violation of the Virginia Consumer Protection
Act, under Virginia Code § 59.1-200. On cross-motions for summary
judgment, the district court granted Haute Diggity Dog’s motion and
denied LVM’s motion, entering judgment in favor of Haute Diggity
Dog on all of the claims. It rested its analysis on each count princi-
pally on the conclusion that Haute Diggity Dog’s products amounted
to a successful parody of LVM’s marks, trade dress, and copyright.
See Louis Vuitton Malletier S.A. v. Haute Diggity Dog, LLC, 464 F.
Supp. 2d 495 (E.D. Va. 2006). 

LVM appealed and now challenges, as a matter of law, virtually

every ruling made by the district court. 

6

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

II

LVM contends first that Haute Diggity Dog’s marketing and sale
of its "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys infringe its trademarks because the
advertising and sale of the "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys is likely to cause
confusion. See 15 U.S.C. § 1114(1)(a). LVM argues:

The defendants in this case are using almost an exact imita-
tion of the house mark VUITTON (merely omitting a sec-
ond  "T"),  and 
they  painstakingly  copied  Vuitton’s
Monogram  design  mark,  right  down  to  the  exact  arrange-
ment and sequence of geometric symbols. They also used
the same design marks, trade dress, and color combinations
embodied  in  Vuitton’s  Monogram  Multicolor  and  Mono-
gram Cerises [Cherry] handbag collections. Moreover, HDD
did  not  add  any  language  to  distinguish  its  products  from
Vuitton’s, and its products are not "widely recognized."1 

Haute Diggity Dog contends that there is no evidence of confusion,
nor could a reasonable factfinder conclude that there is a likelihood
of confusion, because it successfully markets its products as parodies
of  famous  marks  such  as  those  of  LVM.  It  asserts  that  "precisely
because of the [famous] mark’s fame and popularity . . . confusion is
avoided, and it is this lack of confusion that a parodist depends upon
to achieve the parody." Thus, responding to LVM’s claims of trade-
mark infringement, Haute Diggity Dog argues:

The marks are undeniably similar in certain respects. There
are  visual  and  phonetic  similarities.  [Haute  Diggity  Dog]

1We take this argument to be that Haute Diggity Dog is copying too
closely the marks and trade dress of LVM. But we reject the statement
that LVM has a trademark consisting of the one word VUITTON. At oral
argument,  counsel  for  LVM  conceded  that  the  trademark  is  "LOUIS
VUITTON," and it is always used in that manner rather than simply as
"VUITTON." It appears that LVM has employed this technique to pro-
vide a more narrow, but irrelevant, comparison between its VUITTON
and Haute Diggity Dog’s "Vuiton." In resolving this case, however, we
take LVM’s arguments to compare "LOUIS VUITTON" with Haute Dig-
gity Dog’s "Chewy Vuiton." 

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

7

admits that the product name and design mimics LVM’s and
is based on the LVM marks. It is necessary for the pet prod-
ucts to conjure up the original designer mark for there to be
a parody at all. However, a parody also relies on "equally
obvious dissimilarit[ies] between the marks" to produce its
desired effect. 

Concluding that Haute Diggity Dog did not create any likelihood
of confusion as a matter of law, the district court granted summary
judgment  to  Haute  Diggity  Dog.  Louis  Vuitton  Malletier,  464  F.
Supp. 2d at 503, 508. We review its order de novo. See CareFirst of
Md., Inc. v. First Care, P.C., 434 F.3d 263, 267 (4th Cir. 2006). 

To prove trademark infringement, LVM must show (1) that it owns
a valid and protectable mark; (2) that Haute Diggity Dog uses a "re-
production, counterfeit, copy, or colorable imitation" of that mark in
commerce and without LVM’s consent; and (3) that Haute Diggity
Dog’s use is likely to cause confusion. 15 U.S.C. § 1114(1)(a); Care-
First,  434  F.3d  at  267.  The  validity  and  protectability  of  LVM’s
marks are not at issue in this case, nor is the fact that Haute Diggity
Dog uses a colorable imitation of LVM’s mark. Therefore, we give
the first two elements no further attention. To determine whether the
"Chewy Vuiton" product line creates a likelihood of confusion, we
have  identified  several  nonexclusive  factors  to  consider:  (1)  the
strength or distinctiveness of the plaintiff’s mark; (2) the similarity of
the two marks; (3) the similarity of the goods or services the marks
identify; (4) the similarity of the facilities the two parties use in their
businesses; (5) the similarity of the advertising used by the two par-
ties; (6) the defendant’s intent; and (7) actual confusion. See Pizzeria
Uno  Corp.  v.  Temple, 747 F.2d 1522, 1527 (4th Cir. 1984). These
Pizzeria Uno factors are not always weighted equally, and not all fac-
tors are relevant in every case. See CareFirst, 434 F.3d at 268. 

Because Haute Diggity Dog’s arguments with respect to the Pizze-
ria Uno factors depend to a great extent on whether its products and
marks are successful parodies, we consider first whether Haute Dig-
gity Dog’s products, marks, and trade dress are indeed successful par-
odies of LVM’s marks and trade dress. 

For trademark purposes, "[a] ‘parody’ is defined as a simple form
of entertainment conveyed by juxtaposing the irreverent representa-

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

8
tion of the trademark with the idealized image created by the mark’s
owner."  People  for  the  Ethical  Treatment  of  Animals  v.  Doughney
("PETA"),  263  F.3d  359,  366  (4th  Cir.  2001)  (internal  quotation
marks  omitted).  "A  parody  must  convey  two  simultaneous  —  and
contradictory — messages: that it is the original, but also that it is not
the original and is instead a parody." Id. (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted). This second message must not only differentiate the
alleged  parody  from  the  original  but  must  also  communicate  some
articulable  element  of  satire,  ridicule,  joking,  or  amusement.  Thus,
"[a] parody relies upon a difference from the original mark, presum-
ably a humorous difference, in order to produce its desired effect."
Jordache Enterprises, Inc. v. Hogg Wyld, Ltd., 828 F.2d 1482, 1486
(10th  Cir.  1987)  (finding  the  use  of  "Lardashe"  jeans  for  larger
women  to  be  a  successful  and  permissible  parody  of  "Jordache"
jeans). 

When applying the PETA criteria to the facts of this case, we agree
with the district court that the "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys are success-
ful parodies of LVM handbags and the LVM marks and trade dress
used in connection with the marketing and sale of those handbags.
First, the pet chew toy is obviously an irreverent, and indeed inten-
tional, representation of an LVM handbag, albeit much smaller and
coarser.  The  dog  toy  is  shaped  roughly  like  a  handbag;  its  name
"Chewy Vuiton" sounds like and rhymes with LOUIS VUITTON; its
monogram  CV  mimics  LVM’s  LV  mark;  the  repetitious  design
clearly imitates the design on the LVM handbag; and the coloring is
similar. In short, the dog toy is a small, plush imitation of an LVM
handbag carried by women, which invokes the marks and design of
the handbag, albeit irreverently and incompletely. No one can doubt
that LVM handbags are the target of the imitation by Haute Diggity
Dog’s "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys. 

At the same time, no one can doubt also that the "Chewy Vuiton"
dog toy is not the "idealized image" of the mark created by LVM. The
differences are immediate, beginning with the fact that the "Chewy
Vuiton" product is a dog toy, not an expensive, luxury LOUIS VUIT-
TON handbag. The toy is smaller, it is plush, and virtually all of its
designs  differ.  Thus,  "Chewy  Vuiton"  is  not  LOUIS  VUITTON
("Chewy" is not "LOUIS" and "Vuiton" is not "VUITTON," with its
two Ts); CV is not LV; the designs on the dog toy are simplified and

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

9
crude, not detailed and distinguished. The toys are inexpensive; the
handbags  are  expensive  and  marketed  to  be  expensive.  And,  of
course, as a dog toy, one must buy it with pet supplies and cannot buy
it at an exclusive LVM store or boutique within a department store.
In short, the Haute Diggity Dog "Chewy Vuiton" dog toy undoubt-
edly and deliberately conjures up the famous LVM marks and trade
dress, but at the same time, it communicates that it is not the LVM
product. 

Finally, the juxtaposition of the similar and dissimilar — the irrev-
erent representation and the idealized image of an LVM handbag —
immediately conveys a joking and amusing parody. The furry little
"Chewy  Vuiton"  imitation,  as  something  to  be  chewed  by  a  dog,
pokes fun at the elegance and expensiveness of a LOUIS VUITTON
handbag, which must not be chewed by a dog. The LVM handbag is
provided for the most elegant and well-to-do celebrity, to proudly dis-
play to the public and the press, whereas the imitation "Chewy Vui-
ton" "handbag" is designed to mock the celebrity and be used by a
dog. The dog toy irreverently presents haute couture as an object for
casual canine destruction. The satire is unmistakable. The dog toy is
a comment on the rich and famous, on the LOUIS VUITTON name
and related marks, and on conspicuous consumption in general. This
parody is enhanced by the fact that "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys are sold
with  similar  parodies  of  other  famous  and  expensive  brands  —
"Chewnel No. 5" targeting "Chanel No. 5"; "Dog Perignonn" target-
ing "Dom Perignon"; and "Sniffany & Co." targeting "Tiffany & Co."
We conclude that the PETA criteria are amply satisfied in this case
and  that  the  "Chewy  Vuiton"  dog  toys  convey  "just  enough  of  the
original design to allow the consumer to appreciate the point of par-
ody," but stop well short of appropriating the entire marks that LVM
claims. PETA, 263 F.3d at 366 (quoting Jordache, 828 F.2d at 1486).
Finding that Haute Diggity Dog’s parody is successful, however,
does not end the inquiry into whether Haute Diggity Dog’s "Chewy
Vuiton" products create a likelihood of confusion. See 6 J. Thomas
McCarthy, Trademarks and Unfair Competition § 31:153, at 262 (4th
ed. 2007) ("There are confusing parodies and non-confusing parodies.
All they have in common is an attempt at humor through the use of
someone else’s trademark"). The finding of a successful parody only

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

10
influences the way in which the Pizzeria Uno factors are applied. See,
e.g., Anheuser-Busch, Inc. v. L & L Wings, Inc., 962 F.2d 316, 321
(4th  Cir.  1992)  (observing  that  parody  alters  the  likelihood-of-
confusion analysis). Indeed, it becomes apparent that an effective par-
ody will actually diminish the likelihood of confusion, while an inef-
fective parody does not. We now turn to the Pizzeria Uno factors. 

A

As to the first Pizzeria Uno factor, the parties agree that LVM’s
marks are strong and widely recognized. They do not agree, however,
as  to  the  consequences  of  this  fact.  LVM  maintains  that  a  strong,
famous mark is entitled, as a matter of law, to broad protection. While
it is true that finding a mark to be strong and famous usually favors
the plaintiff in a trademark infringement case, the opposite may be
true  when  a  legitimate  claim  of  parody  is  involved.  As  the  district
court observed, "In cases of parody, a strong mark’s fame and popu-
larity is precisely the mechanism by which likelihood of confusion is
avoided." Louis Vuitton Malletier, 464 F. Supp. 2d at 499 (citing Hor-
mel Foods Corp. v. Jim Henson Prods., Inc., 73 F.3d 497, 503-04 (2d
Cir. 1996); Schieffelin & Co. v. Jack Co. of Boca, Inc., 850 F. Supp.
232, 248 (S.D.N.Y. 1994)). "An intent to parody is not an intent to
confuse the public." Jordache, 828 F.2d at 1486. 

We agree with the district court. It is a matter of common sense
that the strength of a famous mark allows consumers immediately to
perceive the target of the parody, while simultaneously allowing them
to recognize the changes to the mark that make the parody funny or
biting. See Tommy Hilfiger Licensing, Inc. v. Nature Labs, LLC, 221
F. Supp. 2d 410, 416 (S.D.N.Y. 2002) (noting that the strength of the
"TOMMY HILFIGER" fashion mark did not favor the mark’s owner
in  an  infringement  case  against  "TIMMY  HOLEDIGGER"  novelty
pet perfume). In this case, precisely because LOUIS VUITTON is so
strong a mark and so well recognized as a luxury handbag brand from
LVM, consumers readily recognize that when they see a "Chewy Vui-
ton" pet toy, they see a parody. Thus, the strength of LVM’s marks
in this case does not help LVM establish a likelihood of confusion.

B

With  respect  to  the  second  Pizzeria  Uno  factor,  the  similarities
between the marks, the usage by Haute Diggity Dog again converts

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

11
what might be a problem for Haute Diggity Dog into a disfavored
conclusion for LVM. 

Haute Diggity Dog concedes that its marks are and were designed
to be somewhat similar to LVM’s marks. But that is the essence of
a parody — the invocation of a famous mark in the consumer’s mind,
so long as the distinction between the marks is also readily recog-
nized.  While  a  trademark  parody  necessarily  copies  enough  of  the
original design to bring it to mind as a target, a successful parody also
distinguishes  itself  and,  because  of  the  implicit  message  communi-
cated by the parody, allows the consumer to appreciate it. See PETA,
263 F.3d at 366 (citing Jordache, 828 F.2d at 1486); Anheuser-Busch,
962 F.2d at 321. 

In concluding that Haute Diggity Dog has a successful parody, we
have impliedly concluded that Haute Diggity Dog appropriately mim-
icked a part of the LVM marks, but at the same time sufficiently dis-
tinguished its own product to communicate the satire. The differences
are sufficiently obvious and the parody sufficiently blatant that a con-
sumer encountering a "Chewy Vuiton" dog toy would not mistake its
source or sponsorship on the basis of mark similarity. 

This  conclusion  is  reinforced  when  we  consider  how  the  parties
actually use their marks in the marketplace. See CareFirst, 434 F.3d
at 267 (citing What-A-Burger of Va., Inc. v. Whataburger, Inc., 357
F.3d 441, 450 (4th Cir. 2004)); Lamparello v. Falwell, 420 F.3d 309,
316 (4th Cir. 2005); Hormel Foods, 73 F.3d at 503. The record amply
supports  Haute  Diggity  Dog’s  contention  that  its  "Chewy  Vuiton"
toys for dogs are generally sold alongside other pet products, as well
as  toys  that  parody  other  luxury  brands,  whereas  LVM  markets  its
handbags as a top-end luxury item to be purchased only in its own
stores or in its own boutiques within department stores. These market-
ing channels further emphasize that "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys are not,
in fact, LOUIS VUITTON products. 

C

Nor does LVM find support from the third Pizzeria Uno factor, the
similarity  of  the  products  themselves.  It  is  obvious  that  a  "Chewy
Vuiton" plush imitation handbag, which does not open and is manu-

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

12
factured as a dog toy, is not a LOUIS VUITTON handbag sold by
LVM. Even LVM’s most proximate products — dog collars, leashes,
and pet carriers — are fashion accessories, not dog toys. As Haute
Diggity Dog points out, LVM does not make pet chew toys and likely
does not intend to do so in the future. Even if LVM were to make dog
toys in the future, the fact remains that the products at issue are not
similar in any relevant respect, and this factor does not favor LVM.

D

The fourth and fifth Pizzeria Uno factors, relating to the similarity
of facilities and advertising channels, have already been mentioned.
LVM products are sold exclusively through its own stores or its own
boutiques within department stores. It also sells its products on the
Internet  through  an  LVM-authorized  website.  In  contrast,  "Chewy
Vuiton" products are sold primarily through traditional and Internet
pet  stores,  although  they  might  also  be  sold  in  some  department
stores.  The  record  demonstrates  that  both  LVM  handbags  and
"Chewy Vuiton" dog toys are sold at a Macy’s department store in
New York. As a general matter, however, there is little overlap in the
individual retail stores selling the brands. 

Likewise with respect to advertising, there is little or no overlap.
LVM markets LOUIS VUITTON handbags through high-end fashion
magazines, while "Chewy Vuiton" products are advertised primarily
through pet-supply channels. 

The overlap in facilities and advertising demonstrated by the record
is so minimal as to be practically nonexistent. "Chewy Vuiton" toys
and LOUIS VUITTON products are neither sold nor advertised in the
same way, and the de minimis overlap lends insignificant support to
LVM on this factor. 

E

The sixth factor, relating to Haute Diggity Dog’s intent, again is
neutralized by the fact that Haute Diggity Dog markets a parody of
LVM products. As other courts have recognized, "An intent to parody
is not an intent to confuse the public." Jordache, 828 F.2d at 1486.

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

13
Despite Haute Diggity Dog’s obvious intent to profit from its use of
parodies, this action does not amount to a bad faith intent to create
consumer confusion. To the contrary, the intent is to do just the oppo-
site — to evoke a humorous, satirical association that distinguishes
the products. This factor does not favor LVM. 

F

On the actual confusion factor, it is well established that no actual
confusion  is  required  to  prove  a  case  of  trademark  infringement,
although the presence of actual confusion can be persuasive evidence
relating to a likelihood of confusion. See CareFirst, 434 F.3d at 268.
While LVM conceded in the district court that there was no evi-
dence  of  actual  confusion,  on  appeal  it  points  to  incidents  where
retailers  misspelled  "Chewy  Vuiton"  on  invoices  or  order  forms,
using  two  Ts  instead  of  one.  Many  of  these  invoices  also  reflect
simultaneous orders for multiple types of Haute Diggity Dog parody
products, which belies the notion that any actual confusion existed as
to the source of "Chewy Vuiton" plush toys. The misspellings pointed
out by LVM are far more likely in this context to indicate confusion
over  how  to  spell  the  product  name  than  any  confusion  over  the
source or sponsorship of the "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys. We conclude
that this factor favors Haute Diggity Dog. 

In  sum,  the  likelihood-of-confusion  factors  substantially  favor
Haute Diggity Dog. But consideration of these factors is only a proxy
for the ultimate statutory test of whether Haute Diggity Dog’s market-
ing,  sale,  and  distribution  of  "Chewy  Vuiton"  dog  toys  is  likely  to
cause confusion. Recognizing that "Chewy Vuiton" is an obvious par-
ody and applying the Pizzeria Uno factors, we conclude that LVM
has failed to demonstrate any likelihood of confusion. Accordingly,
we affirm the district court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of
Haute Diggity Dog on the issue of trademark infringement. 

III

LVM also contends that Haute Diggity Dog’s advertising, sale, and
distribution of the "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys dilutes its LOUIS VUIT-

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

14
TON, LV, and Monogram Canvas marks, which are famous and dis-
tinctive, in violation of the Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006
("TDRA"), 15 U.S.C.A. § 1125(c) (West Supp. 2007). It argues, "Be-
fore  the  district  court’s  decision,  Vuitton’s  famous  marks  were
unblurred by any third party trademark use." "Allowing defendants to
become the first to use similar marks will obviously blur and dilute
the Vuitton Marks." It also contends that "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys
are likely to tarnish LVM’s marks because they "pose a choking haz-
ard for some dogs." 

Haute Diggity Dog urges that, in applying the TDRA to the cir-
cumstances before us, we reject LVM’s suggestion that a parody "au-
tomatically"  gives  rise  to  "actionable  dilution."  Haute  Diggity  Dog
contends that only marks that are "identical or substantially similar"
can give rise to actionable dilution, and its "Chewy Vuiton" marks are
not identical or sufficiently similar to LVM’s marks. It also argues
that "[its] spoof, like other obvious parodies," "‘tends to increase pub-
lic identification’ of [LVM’s] mark with [LVM]," quoting Jordache,
828  F.2d  at  1490,  rather  than  impairing  its  distinctiveness,  as  the
TDRA requires. As for LVM’s tarnishment claim, Haute Diggity Dog
argues that LVM’s position is at best based on speculation and that
LVM has made no showing of a likelihood of dilution by tarnishment.
Claims for trademark dilution are authorized by the TDRA, a rela-

tively recent enactment,2 which provides in relevant part:

Subject to the principles of equity, the owner of a famous
mark . . . shall be entitled to an injunction against another

2The TDRA, Pub. L. No. 109-312, 120 Stat. 1730 (2006), amended the
Federal Trademark Dilution Act of 1995, Pub. L. No. 104-98, 109 Stat.
985 (1996), which added a "dilution" cause of action to § 43 of the Lan-
ham  Act.  When  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  the  Federal  Trademark
Dilution Act required proof of actual dilution and actual economic harm,
see Moseley v. V Secret Catalogue, Inc., 537 U.S. 418, 432-33 (2003);
see also Ringling Bros.-Barnum & Bailey Combined Shows, Inc. v. Utah
Div.  of  Travel  Dev.,  170  F.3d  449,  461  (4th  Cir.  1999),  Congress
amended the Act principally to overrule Moseley and to require that only
a  likelihood of dilution need be proved.  See 15 U.S.C.A. § 1125(c)(1)
(West Supp. 2007). 

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

15

person who . . . commences use of a mark or trade name in
commerce that is likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilu-
tion by tarnishment of the famous mark, regardless of the
presence or absence of actual or likely confusion, of compe-
tition, or of actual economic injury. 

15  U.S.C.A.  § 1125(c)(1)  (emphasis  added).  A  mark  is  "famous"
when it is "widely recognized by the general consuming public of the
United States as a designation of source of the goods or services of
the mark’s owner." Id. § 1125(c)(2)(A). Creating causes of action for
only  dilution  by  blurring  and  dilution  by  tarnishment,  the  TDRA
defines "dilution by blurring" as the "association arising from the sim-
ilarity between a mark or trade name and a famous mark that impairs
the  distinctiveness  of  the  famous  mark."  Id.  § 1125(c)(2)(B).  It
defines "dilution by tarnishment" as the "association arising from the
similarity  between  a  mark  or  trade  name  and  a  famous  mark  that
harms the reputation of the famous mark." Id. § 1125(c)(2)(C). 

Thus, to state a dilution claim under the TDRA, a plaintiff must

show: 
(1) 

that the plaintiff owns a famous mark that is distinc-
tive; 
that  the  defendant  has  commenced  using  a  mark  in
commerce that allegedly is diluting the famous mark;
that a similarity between the defendant’s mark and the
famous mark gives rise to an association between the
marks; and 
that the association is likely to impair the distinctive-
ness of the famous mark or likely to harm the reputa-
tion of the famous mark.

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

In the context of blurring, distinctiveness refers to the ability of the
famous mark uniquely to identify a single source and thus maintain
its selling power. See N.Y. Stock Exch. v. N.Y., N.Y. Hotel LLC, 293
F.3d 550, 558 (2d Cir. 2002) (observing that blurring occurs where

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

16
the  defendant’s  use  creates  "the  possibility  that  the  [famous]  mark
will lose its ability to serve as a unique identifier of the plaintiff’s
product") (quoting Deere & Co. v. MTD Prods., Inc., 41 F.3d 39, 43
(2d Cir. 1994)); Playboy Entm’t, Inc. v. Welles, 279 F.3d 796, 805
(9th Cir. 2002) (same). In proving a dilution claim under the TDRA,
the plaintiff need not show actual or likely confusion, the presence of
competition, or actual economic injury. See 15 U.S.C.A. § 1125(c)(1).
The TDRA creates three defenses based on the defendant’s (1) "fair
use" (with exceptions); (2) "news reporting and news commentary";
and (3) "noncommercial use." Id. § 1125(c)(3). 

A

We address first LVM’s claim for dilution by blurring. 
The first three elements of a trademark dilution claim are not at
issue  in  this  case.  LVM  owns  famous  marks  that  are  distinctive;
Haute  Diggity  Dog  has  commenced  using  "Chewy  Vuiton,"  "CV,"
and designs and colors that are allegedly diluting LVM’s marks; and
the similarity between Haute Diggity Dog’s marks and LVM’s marks
gives rise to an association between the marks, albeit a parody. The
issue for resolution is whether the association between Haute Diggity
Dog’s marks and LVM’s marks is likely to impair the distinctiveness
of LVM’s famous marks. 

In deciding this issue, the district court correctly outlined the six
factors to be considered in determining whether dilution by blurring
has been shown. See 15 U.S.C.A. § 1125(c)(2)(B). But in evaluating
the facts of the case, the court did not directly apply those factors it
enumerated. It held simply:

[The famous mark’s] strength is not likely to be blurred by
a  parody  dog  toy  product.  Instead  of  blurring  Plaintiff’s
mark, the success of the parodic use depends upon the con-
tinued association with LOUIS VUITTON. 

Louis Vuitton Malletier, 464 F. Supp. 2d at 505. The amicus support-
ing LVM’s position in this case contends that the district court, by not

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

17
applying the statutory factors, misapplied the TDRA to conclude that
simply because Haute Diggity Dog’s product was a parody meant that
"there  can  be  no  association  with  the  famous  mark  as  a  matter  of
law." Moreover, the amicus points out correctly that to rule in favor
of Haute Diggity Dog, the district court was required to find that the
"association"  did  not  impair  the  distinctiveness  of  LVM’s  famous
mark. 

LVM goes further in its own brief, however, and contends:
  When a defendant uses an imitation of a famous mark in
connection with related goods, a claim of parody cannot pre-
clude liability for dilution. 

* 

  * 

  *

  The district court’s opinion utterly ignores the substantial
goodwill  VUITTON  has  established  in  its  famous  marks
through more than a century of exclusive use. Disregarding
the  clear  Congressional  mandate  to  protect  such  famous
marks against dilution, the district court has granted [Haute
Diggity Dog] permission to become the first company other
than VUITTON to use imitations of the famous VUITTON
Marks.

In short, LVM suggests that any use by a third person of an imitation
of its famous marks dilutes the famous marks as a matter of law. This
contention misconstrues the TDRA. 

The  TDRA  prohibits  a  person  from  using  a  junior  mark  that  is
likely to dilute (by blurring) the famous mark, and blurring is defined
to be an impairment to the famous mark’s distinctiveness. "Distinc-
tiveness"  in  turn  refers  to  the  public’s  recognition  that  the  famous
mark identifies a single source of the product using the famous mark.
To determine whether a junior mark is likely to dilute a famous
mark through blurring, the TDRA directs the court to consider all fac-
tors relevant to the issue, including six factors that are enumerated in
the statute:

18

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

(i)  The  degree  of  similarity  between  the  mark  or  trade

name and the famous mark.

(ii)  The degree of inherent or acquired distinctiveness of

the famous mark.

(iii)  The extent to which the owner of the famous mark is
engaging in substantially exclusive use of the mark.

(iv)  The degree of recognition of the famous mark.
(v)  Whether the user of the mark or trade name intended

to create an association with the famous mark.

(vi)  Any  actual  association  between  the  mark  or  trade

name and the famous mark.

15  U.S.C.A.  § 1125(c)(2)(B).  Not  every  factor  will  be  relevant  in
every case, and not every blurring claim will require extensive discus-
sion of the factors. But a trial court must offer a sufficient indication
of which factors it has found persuasive and explain why they are per-
suasive so that the court’s decision can be reviewed. The district court
did not do this adequately in this case. Nonetheless, after we apply the
factors as a matter of law, we reach the same conclusion reached by
the district court. 

We begin by noting that parody is not automatically a complete
defense to a claim of dilution by blurring where the defendant uses
the  parody  as  its  own  designation  of  source,  i.e.,  as  a  trademark.
Although the TDRA does provide that fair use is a complete defense
and allows that a parody can be considered fair use, it does not extend
the fair use defense to parodies used as a trademark. As the statute
provides:

The following shall not be actionable as dilution by blurring
or dilution by tarnishment under this subsection: 

(A)  Any fair use . . . other than as a designation
of source for the person’s own goods or services,

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG
including  use  in  connection  with  .  .  .  parodying
. . . . 

19

15 U.S.C.A. § 1125(c)(3)(A)(ii) (emphasis added). Under the statute’s
plain language, parodying a famous mark is protected by the fair use
defense only if the parody is not "a designation of source for the per-
son’s own goods or services." 

The TDRA, however, does not require a court to ignore the exis-
tence of a parody that is used as a trademark, and it does not preclude
a court from considering parody as part of the circumstances to be
considered for determining whether the plaintiff has made out a claim
for dilution by blurring. Indeed, the statute permits a court to consider
"all  relevant  factors," 
in
§ 1125(c)(2)(B). 

the  six  factors  supplied 

including 

Thus, it would appear that a defendant’s use of a mark as a parody
is relevant to the overall question of whether the defendant’s use is
likely to impair the famous mark’s distinctiveness. Moreover, the fact
that the defendant uses its marks as a parody is specifically relevant
to several of the listed factors. For example, factor (v) (whether the
defendant  intended  to  create  an  association  with  the  famous  mark)
and factor (vi) (whether there exists an actual association between the
defendant’s mark and the famous mark) directly invite inquiries into
the defendant’s intent in using the parody, the defendant’s actual use
of  the  parody,  and  the  effect  that  its  use  has  on  the  famous  mark.
While a parody intentionally creates an association with the famous
mark in order to be a parody, it also intentionally communicates, if
it is successful, that it is not the famous mark, but rather a satire of
the famous mark. See PETA, 263 F.3d at 366. That the defendant is
using its mark as a parody is therefore relevant in the consideration
of these statutory factors. 

Similarly,  factors  (i),  (ii),  and  (iv)  —  the  degree  of  similarity
between the two marks, the degree of distinctiveness of the famous
mark, and its recognizability — are directly implicated by consider-
ation  of  the  fact  that  the  defendant’s  mark  is  a  successful  parody.
Indeed, by making the famous mark an object of the parody, a suc-
cessful parody might actually enhance the famous mark’s distinctive-
ness by making it an icon. The brunt of the joke becomes yet more

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

20
famous. See Hormel Foods, 73 F.3d at 506 (observing that a success-
ful  parody  "tends  to  increase  public  identification"  of  the  famous
mark  with  its  source);  see  also  Yankee  Publ’g  Inc.  v.  News  Am.
Publ’g Inc., 809 F. Supp. 267, 272-82 (S.D.N.Y. 1992) (suggesting
that  a  sufficiently  obvious  parody  is  unlikely  to  blur  the  targeted
famous mark). 

In sum, while a defendant’s use of a parody as a mark does not
support  a  "fair  use"  defense,  it  may  be  considered  in  determining
whether the plaintiff-owner of a famous mark has proved its claim
that the defendant’s use of a parody mark is likely to impair the dis-
tinctiveness of the famous mark. 

In the case before us, when considering factors (ii), (iii), and (iv),
it is readily apparent, indeed conceded by Haute Diggity Dog, that
LVM’s marks are distinctive, famous, and strong. The LOUIS VUIT-
TON mark is well known and is commonly identified as a brand of
the great Parisian fashion house, Louis Vuitton Malletier. So too are
its  other  marks  and  designs,  which  are  invariably  used  with  the
LOUIS VUITTON mark. It may not be too strong to refer to these
famous marks as icons of high fashion. 

While the establishment of these facts satisfies essential elements
of  LVM’s  dilution  claim,  see  15  U.S.C.A.  § 1125(c)(1),  the  facts
impose on LVM an increased burden to demonstrate that the distinc-
tiveness of its famous marks is likely to be impaired by a successful
parody.  Even  as  Haute  Diggity  Dog’s  parody  mimics  the  famous
mark, it communicates simultaneously that it is not the famous mark,
but is only satirizing it. See PETA, 263 F.3d at 366. And because the
famous mark is particularly strong and distinctive, it becomes more
likely that a parody will not impair the distinctiveness of the mark. In
short, as Haute Diggity Dog’s "Chewy Vuiton" marks are a successful
parody, we conclude that they will not blur the distinctiveness of the
famous mark as a unique identifier of its source. 

It is important to note, however, that this might not be true if the
parody is so similar to the famous mark that it likely could be con-
strued as actual use of the famous mark itself. Factor (i) directs an
inquiry into the "degree of similarity between the junior mark and the
famous mark. If Haute Diggity Dog used the actual marks of LVM

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

21
(as a parody or otherwise), it could dilute LVM’s marks by blurring,
regardless of whether Haute Diggity Dog’s use was confusingly simi-
lar, whether it was in competition with LVM, or whether LVM sus-
tained actual injury. See 15 U.S.C.A. § 1125(c)(1). Thus, "the use of
DUPONT  shoes,  BUICK  aspirin,  and  KODAK  pianos  would  be
actionable"  under  the  TDRA  because  the  unauthorized  use  of  the
famous  marks  themselves  on  unrelated  goods  might  diminish  the
capacity of these trademarks to distinctively identify a single source.
Moseley,  537  U.S.  at  431  (quoting  H.R.  Rep.  No.  104-374,  at  3
(1995), as reprinted in 1995 U.S.C.C.A.N. 1029, 1030). This is true
even though a consumer would be unlikely to confuse the manufac-
turer  of  KODAK  film  with  the  hypothetical  producer  of  KODAK
pianos. 

But in this case, Haute Diggity Dog mimicked the famous marks;
it did not come so close to them as to destroy the success of its parody
and, more importantly, to diminish the LVM marks’ capacity to iden-
tify a single source. Haute Diggity Dog designed a pet chew toy to
imitate and suggest, but not use, the marks of a high-fashion LOUIS
VUITTON  handbag.  It  used  "Chewy  Vuiton"  to  mimic  "LOUIS
VUITTON"; it used "CV" to mimic "LV"; and it adopted imperfectly
the items of LVM’s designs. We conclude that these uses by Haute
Diggity Dog were not so similar as to be likely to impair the distinc-
tiveness of LVM’s famous marks. 

In a similar vein, when considering factors (v) and (vi), it becomes
apparent that Haute Diggity Dog intentionally associated its marks,
but only partially and certainly imperfectly, so as to convey the simul-
taneous message that it was not in fact a source of LVM products.
Rather, as a parody, it separated itself from the LVM marks in order
to make fun of them. 

In sum, when considering the relevant factors to determine whether
blurring is likely to occur in this case, we readily come to the conclu-
sion, as did the district court, that LVM has failed to make out a case
of trademark dilution by blurring by failing to establish that the dis-
tinctiveness of its marks was likely to be impaired by Haute Diggity
Dog’s marketing and sale of its "Chewy Vuiton" products. 

22

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

B

LVM’s  claim  for  dilution  by  tarnishment  does  not  require  an
extended  discussion.  To  establish  its  claim  for  dilution  by  tarnish-
ment, LVM must show, in lieu of blurring, that Haute Diggity Dog’s
use of the "Chewy Vuiton" mark on dog toys harms the reputation of
the LOUIS VUITTON mark and LVM’s other marks. LVM argues
that the possibility that a dog could choke on a "Chewy Vuiton" toy
causes this harm. LVM has, however, provided no record support for
its assertion. It relies only on speculation about whether a dog could
choke on the chew toys and a logical concession that a $10 dog toy
made in China was of "inferior quality" to the $1190 LOUIS VUIT-
TON handbag. The speculation begins with LVM’s assertion in its
brief that "defendant Woofie’s admitted that ‘Chewy Vuiton’ prod-
ucts  pose  a  choking  hazard  for  some  dogs.  Having  prejudged  the
defendant’s mark to be a parody, the district court made light of this
admission  in  its  opinion,  and  utterly  failed  to  give  it  the  weight  it
deserved," citing to a page in the district court’s opinion where the
court states:

At  oral  argument,  plaintiff  provided  only  a  flimsy  theory
that a pet may some day choke on a Chewy Vuiton squeak
toy  and  incite  the  wrath  of  a  confused  consumer  against
LOUIS VUITTON. 

Louis Vuitton Malletier, 464 F. Supp. 2d at 505. The court was refer-
ring to counsel’s statement during oral argument that the owner of
Woofie’s stated that "she would not sell this product to certain types
of dogs because there is a danger they would tear it open and choke
on it." There is no record support, however, that any dog has choked
on a pet chew toy, such as a "Chewy Vuiton" toy, or that there is any
basis from which to conclude that a dog would likely choke on such
a toy. 

We agree with the district court that LVM failed to demonstrate a
claim for dilution by tarnishment. See Hormel Foods, 73 F.3d at 507.

IV

LVM  raises  three  additional  claims  premised  on  the  same  basic
facts.  First,  it  argues  that  the  district  court  improperly  rejected  its

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

23
counterfeiting claim under 15 U.S.C. § 1114(1)(a). Section 1127 of
Title 15 defines a "counterfeit" mark as "a spurious mark which is
identical with, or substantially indistinguishable from" the plaintiff’s
mark. The district court found, and we agree, that "Chewy Vuiton"
and the "CV" monogram design are not "substantially indistinguish-
able" from the LOUIS VUITTON and LV marks and that the design
and the coloring patterns are different. See Louis Vuitton Malletier,
464 F. Supp. 2d at 506. In selling "Chewy Vuiton" dog toys, Haute
Diggity  Dog  is  not  selling  knock-off  LOUIS  VUITTON  handbags
with a counterfeit LV mark, and no reasonable trier of fact could so
conclude. 

Second,  LVM  argues  that  the  district  court  erred  in  failing  to
address LVM’s trade dress claims. Although the district court did not
explicitly discuss the trade dress issue, we find that this reflects econ-
omy rather than error. LVM’s trade dress claims under § 43(a) of the
Lanham  Act,  15  U.S.C.  § 1125(a)(1),  and  under  Virginia  common
law are based on essentially the same facts as its trademark infringe-
ment claims. Haute Diggity Dog does not challenge LVM’s claim that
its trade dress is protectable. The only question before the court was
whether confusion was likely. But the same Pizzeria Uno likelihood-
of-confusion  factors  used  for  trademark  infringement  claims  are
applied to trade dress claims, see Tools USA & Equip. Co. v. Champ
Frame Straightening Equip., 87 F.3d 654, 661 (4th Cir. 1996), and
the  two  issues  rise  or  fall  together.  Consequently,  our  conclusion
affirming the district court that no confusion is likely to result with
regard to LVM’s trademarks is sufficient also to dispose of LVM’s
trade dress claims as well. 

Finally,  LVM  argues  that  the  district  court  erred  in  finding  that
Haute Diggity Dog’s use of the "CV" and the background design was
a fair use of LVM’s copyrighted Multicolor design. Because LVM
attempts to use a copyright claim to pursue what is at its core a trade-
mark and trade dress infringement claim, application of the fair-use
factors  under  the  Copyright  Act  to  these  facts  is  awkward.  See  17
U.S.C. § 107; Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 577
(1994). Nonetheless, after examining the record, we agree with the
district  court  that  Haute  Diggity  Dog’s  use  as  a  parody  of  certain
altered  elements  of  LVM’s  Multicolor  design  does  not  support  a
claim for copyright infringement. 

24

LOUIS VUITTON MALLETIER v. HAUTE DIGGITY DOG

The judgment of the district court is 

AFFIRMED.

