790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Legal Research
Law Dictionaries
Law Schools
Federal Judges
Federal Courts
Federal Contracts
790 F. 2d 1195 - Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc
Home
Federal Reporter, Second Series
790 F.2d.

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc

790 F.2d 1195

55 USLW 2040, 229 U.S.P.Q. 945

METALLURGICAL INDUSTRIES INC., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
FOURTEK, INC., Irving Bielefeldt, Norman Montesino, Gary
Boehm, Michael Sarvadi & Smith International,
Inc., Defendants-Appellees.

No. 84-1773.

United States Court of Appeals,
Fifth Circuit.

June 2, 1986.

Hubbard, Thurman, Turner & Tucker, John Feather, Geary, Stahl & Spencer, Gerald P. Urbach, Dallas, Tex.,
Carella, Byrne, Bain & Gilfillan, John N. Bain, Richard E. Kummer, Roseland, N.J., for plaintiff-appellant.

Christie, Parker & Hale, Richard D. Seibel, E. Roderick Cline, Pasadena, Cal., Richards, Harris & Medlock, V.
Bryan Medlock, Jr., Martin Korn, Dallas, Tex., for Smith Intern.

Crutsinger & Booth, John Booth, Monty L. Ross, Stinson, Mag & Fizzell, William Frank Carroll, Dallas, Tex., for
Bielefeldt.

Vernon, McKinley & Lybrand, James L. Schutza, Dallas, Tex., for Montesino, Boehm & Sarvadi.

Appeal from the United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas.

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 1 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Before GEE, RANDALL and GARWOOD, Circuit Judges.

GEE, Circuit Judge:

Advertisement

Ask a Lawyer Online
Now - Lawyers
Answer in Minutes

1

Today's case requires us to review Texas
law on the misappropriation of trade
secrets. Having done so, we conclude that
the district court misconceived the nature
and elements of this cause of action, a
misconception that led it to direct a
verdict erroneously in favor of appellee
Bielefeldt. We also conclude that the court
abused its discretion in excluding certain
evidence. Accordingly, we affirm in part,
reverse in part, and remand the case for a
new trial.

I. FACTS OF THE CASE

2

We commence with a brief description of the scientific process concerned. Tungsten carbide is a metallic
compound of great value in certain industrial processes. Combined with the metal cobalt, it forms an extremely
hard alloy known as "cemented tungsten carbide"1 used in oil drills, tools for manufacturing metals, and wear-
resistent coatings. Because of its great value, reclamation of carbide from scrap metals is feasible. For a long time,
however, the alloy's extreme resistence to machining made reclamation difficult. In the late 1960's and early
1970's, a new solution--known as the zinc recovery process--was devised, a solution based on carbide's reaction
with zinc at high temperatures. In the crucibles of a furnace, molten zinc will react with the cobalt in the carbide
to cause swelling and cracking of the scrap metal. After this has occurred, the zinc is distilled from the crucible,
leaving the scrap in a more brittle state. The carbide is then ground into a powder, usable in new products as an
alternative to virgin carbide. This process is the generally recognized modern method of carbide reclamation.

3

Metallurgical Industries has been in the business of reclaiming carbide since 1967, using the more primitive
"cold-stream process." In the mid-1970's, Metallurgical began to consider using the zinc recovery process. In that
connection, it came to know appellee Irvin Bielefeldt, a representative of Therm-O-Vac Engineering &
Manufacturing Company (Therm-O-Vac). Negotiations led to a contract authorizing Therm-O-Vac to design and
construct two zinc recovery furnaces, the purchase order for the first being executed in July 1976.

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 2 of 22

Questions Answered Every 9Seconds. Get Legal AnswersOnline & Save Time!justanswer.com790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

4

The furnace arrived in April 1977. Dissatisfied with its performance, Metallurgical modified it extensively. First, it
inserted chill plates in one part of the furnace to create a better temperature differential for distilling the zinc.
Second, Metallurgical replaced the one large crucible then in place with several smaller crucibles to prevent the
zinc from dispersing in the furnace. Third, it replaced segmented heating elements which had caused electrical
arcing with unitary graphite heating elements. Last, it installed a filter in the furnace's vacuum-pumps, which
zinc particles had continually clogged. These efforts proved successful and the modified furnace soon began
commercial operation.

5

In the market for a second furnace in mid-1978, Metallurgical provided to Consarc, another furnace
manufacturer, all its hard-won information about zinc-recovery furnace design. Apparently allowed to watch the
first furnace operate, Consarc employees learned of its modifications. Because Consarc proved unwilling or
unable to build what Metallurgical wanted, however, the agreement fell through, and Metallurgical returned to
Therm-O-Vac for its second furnace. A purchase order was signed in January 1979, and the furnace arrived that
July. Further modifications again had to be made, but commercial production was allegedly achieved in January
1980.

6

In 1980, after Therm-O-Vac went bankrupt, Bielefeldt and three other former Therm-O-Vac employees--Norman
Montesino, Gary Boehm, and Michael Sarvadi--formed Fourtek, Incorporated. Soon thereafter, Fourtek agreed to
build a zinc recovery furnace for appellee Smith International, Incorporated (Smith). The furnace Fourtek
provided incorporated the modifications Metallurgical had made in its furnaces; chilling systems, pump filters,
multiple crucibles, and unitary heating elements. Smith has been unable to use this furnace commercially,
however, because a current shortage of carbide scrap prevents its economically feasible operation.

7

Metallurgical nevertheless brought a diversity action against Smith, Bielefeldt, Montesino, Boehm, and Sarvadi in
November 1981.2 In its complaint, Metallurgical charged the defendants with misappropriating its trade secrets.
Other causes of action, not brought forward on appeal, were breach of contract, interference with business
relations, conversion, and unfair competition. Trial began on June 4, 1984, and Metallurgical spent the next ten
days presenting its case in chief. During this time, testimony indicated Metallurgical's frequent notices to
Bielefeldt that the process was a secret and that the disclosures to him were made in confidence. Another witness
recounted meetings in which the modifications were agreed to; Bielefeldt was allegedly unconvinced about the
efficacy of these changes and contributed little to the discussion. Metallurgical also presented evidence that it had
expended considerable time, effort, and money to modify the furnaces.

8

Advertisement

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 3 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Aberdeen Manufacturing
Webinar - Dploy a Tool to
Measure Goals

Such evidence apparently did not impress the
trial court; at the close of Metallurgical's case,
it granted the defendants' motions for
directed verdicts. Ruling from the bench, the
court provided an array of reasons for its
order. The principal reason advanced was the
court's conclusion that no trade secret is
involved. At trial, Metallurgical acknowledged
that the individual changes, by themselves,
are not secrets; chill plates and pump filters,
for example, are well-known. Metallurgical's
position instead was that the process, taken
as a whole, is a trade secret in the carbide
business. The court, however, refused to
recognize any protection Texas law provides
to a modification process. It also concluded that the information Bielefeldt obtained from working with
Metallurgical is too general to be legally protected. Finally, it ruled that "negative know-how"--the knowledge of
what not to do--is unprotected. All these findings seem to have coalesced into a general conclusion by the court
that this case involves no trade secret. The trial court went on to provide further rationales for its decision; it
ruled that there was evidence of neither Bielefeldt's improper use nor disclosure of any secret, nor of
Metallurgical's having been damaged by any improper misappropriation. Metallurgical appeals all these
conclusions against Bielefeldt and Smith only. It also contends that the court erred in excluding certain evidence.

II. RULES OF REVIEW

9

We begin our discussion by noting the applicable standard of review. In Boeing Co. v. Shipman, 411 F.2d 365, 374
(5th Cir.1969) (en banc), we enounced the standard for deciding whether a directed verdict is proper:

10

[T]he [trial] court should consider all of the evidence--not just that evidence which supports the non-mover's
case--but in the light and with all reasonable inferences most favorable to the party opposed to the motion. If the
facts and inferences point so strongly and overwhelmingly in favor of one party that the Court believes that
reasonable men could not arrive at a contrary verdict, granting of the motions is proper. On the other hand, if
there is substantial evidence opposed to the motions, that is, evidence of such quality and weight that reasonable
and fair-minded men in the exercise of impartial judgment might reach different conclusions, the motions should
be denied, and the case submitted to the jury.

11

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 4 of 22

Watch this webinar and learnstrategies to measure operationalperformance!go.tbmcg.com790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

The standard of review on appeal is the same. See, e.g., Bobb v. Modern Products, Inc., 648 F.2d 1051, 1057 (5th
Cir.1981). We must therefore consider all evidence and inferences most favorably to Metallurgical.

12

Because the district court provided so many reasons for its order, we feel compelled to discuss the law of trade
secrets in detail. Our discussion concentrates on Texas law, despite a clause in both purchase order agreements
that their interpretation is to be made under New Jersey law. This stems from the nature of this case; as will be
explained below, we are dealing with a cause of action sounding in tort, not one based on contract.

13

Individual attention to the various elements of this tort is necessary to provide an easily-understood analysis, but
we can here briefly summarize the discussion. A plaintiff must certainly show that a "trade secret" is involved; the
definition of this term is therefore crucial and must be based on several factors. If the trial court concludes that a
trade secret exists, it then must determine whether the defendant committed any wrongdoing. One who breaches
the confidence reposed in him by the holder of a trade secret and one who obtains the secret can be held
accountable. No defendant may be liable, however, unless he has "disclosed" or "used" the secret improperly;
again, defining these terms is required. These considerations are the sum and substance of the cause of action
involved. After expounding the substantive law, we then turn to issues regarding the district court's evidentiary
rulings and the relief available to Metallurgical.

14

III. DEFINING A "TRADE SECRET"

15

We begin by reviewing the legal definition of a trade secret. Of course, to qualify as one, the subject matter
involved must, in fact, be a secret; "[m]atters of general knowledge in an industry cannot be appropriated by one
as his secret." Wissman v. Boucher, 150 Tex. 326, 240 S.W.2d 278, 280 (1951); see also Zoecon Industries v.
American Stockman Tag Co., 713 F.2d 1174, 1179 (5th Cir.1983) ("a customer list of readily ascertainable names
and addresses will not be protected as a trade secret"). Smith emphasizes the absence of any secret because the
basic zinc recovery process has been publicized in the trade. Acknowledging the publicity of the zinc recovery
process, however, we nevertheless conclude that Metallurgical's particular modification efforts can be as yet
unknown to the industry. A general description of the zinc recovery process reveals nothing about the benefits
unitary heating elements and vacuum pump filters can provide to that procedure. That the scientific principles
involved are generally known does not necessarily refute Metallurgical's claim of trade secrets.

16

Metallurgical, furthermore, presented evidence to back up its claim. One of its main witnesses was Arnold Blum,

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 5 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

a consultant very influential in the decisions to modify the furnaces. Blum testified as to his belief that
Metallurgical's changes were unknown in the carbide reclamation industry. The evidence also shows
Metallurgical's efforts to keep secret its modifications. Blum testified that he noted security measures taken to
conceal the furnaces from all but authorized personnel. The furnaces were in areas hidden from public view,
while signs warned all about restricted access. Company policy, moreover, required everyone authorized to see
the furnace to sign a non-disclosure agreement. These measures constitute evidence probative of the existence of
secrets. One's subjective belief of a secret's existence suggests that the secret exists. Security measures, after all,
cost money; a manufacturer therefore presumably would not incur these costs if it believed its competitors
already knew about the information involved. In University Computing Co. v. Lykes-Youngstown Corp., 504 F.2d
518, 535 (5th Cir.1974), we regarded subjective belief as a factor to consider in determining whether secrecy
exists. Because evidence of security measures is relevant, that shown here helps us conclude that a reasonable
jury could have found the existence of the requisite secrecy.

17

Smith argues, however, that Metallurgical's disclosure to other parties vitiated the secrecy required to obtain
legal protection. As mentioned before, Metallurgical revealed its information to Consarc Corporation in 1978; it
also disclosed information in 1980 to La Floridienne, its European licensee of carbide reclamation technology.
Because both these disclosures occurred before Bielefeldt allegedly misappropriated the knowledge of
modifications, others knew of the information when the Smith furnace was built. This being so, Smith argues, no
trade secret in fact existed.

18

Although the law requires secrecy, it need not be absolute. Public revelation would, of course, dispel all secrecy,
but the holder of a secret need not remain totally silent:

19

He may, without losing his protection, communicate it to employees involved in its use. He may likewise
communicate it to others pledged to secrecy.... Nevertheless, a substantial element of secrecy must exist, so that
except by the use of improper means, there would be difficulty in acquiring the information.

20

Restatement of Torts, Sec. 757 Comment b (1939). We conclude that a holder may divulge his information to a
limited extent without destroying its status as a trade secret. To hold otherwise would greatly limit the holder's
ability to profit from his secret. If disclosure to others is made to further the holder's economic interests, it
should, in appropriate circumstances, be considered a limited disclosure that does not destroy the requisite
secrecy. The only question is whether we are dealing with a limited disclosure here.

21

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 6 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Prior caselaw provides no guidance on what constitutes limited disclosure. Metallurgical cites Hyde Corp. v.
Huffines, 158 Tex. 566, 314 S.W.2d 763, cert. denied 358 U.S. 898, 79 S.Ct. 223, 3 L.Ed.2d 148 (1958), and Sikes
v. McGraw Edison Co., 665 F.2d 731 (5th Cir.), cert. denied 458 U.S. 1108, 102 S.Ct. 3488, 73 L.Ed.2d 1369
(1982), in contending that subsequent disclosure of a trade secret does not free one from the constraint of a prior
confidential disclosure. In both of these cases, however, publication of the trade secret by its holder followed an
improper use by one in whom the holder had confided. This factual difference renders these cases inapposite.

22

Looking instead to the policy considerations involved, we glean two reasons why Metallurgical's disclosures to
others are limited and therefore insufficient to extinguish the secrecy Metallurgical's other evidence has
suggested. First, the disclosures were not public announcements; rather, Metallurgical divulged its information
to only two businesses with whom it was dealing. This case thus differs from Luccous v. J.C. Kinley Co., 376
S.W.2d 336 (Tex.1964), in which the court concluded that the design of a device could not be a trade secret
because it had been patented--and thus revealed to all the world--before any dealing between the parties. Second,
the disclosures were made to further Metallurgical's economic interests. Disclosure to Consarc was made with the
hope that Consarc could build the second furnace. A longstanding agreement gave La Floridienne the right, as a
licensee, to the information in exchange for royalty payments. Metallurgical therefore revealed its discoveries as
part of business transactions by which it expected to profit.

23

Metallurgical's case would have been stronger had it also presented evidence of confidential relationships with
these two companies, but we are unwilling to regard this failure as conclusively disproving the limited nature of
the disclosures. Smith correctly points out that Metallurgical bears the burden of showing the existence of
confidential relationships. Contrary to Smith's assertion, however, confidentiality is not a requisite; it is only a
factor to consider. Whether a disclosure is limited is an issue the resolution of which depends on weighing many
facts. The inferences from those facts, construed favorably to Metallurgical, is that it wished only to profit from
its secrets in its business dealings, not to reveal its secrets to the public. We therefore are unpersuaded by Smith's
argument.

24

Existing law, however, emphasizes other requisites for legal recognition of a trade secret. In Huffines, 314 S.W.2d
763, a seminal case of trade secret law, Texas adopted the widely-recognized pronouncements of the American
Law Institute's Restatement of the Law. The Texas Supreme Court quoted the Restatement's definition of a trade
secret:

25

A trade secret may consist of any formula, pattern, device, or compilation of information which is used in one's
business, and which gives him an opportunity to obtain an advantage over competitors who do not know it. It

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 7 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

may be a chemical compound, a process of manufacturing, treating or preserving materials, a pattern for a
machine or other device or a list of customers.

26

Id. at 776, quoting Restatement of Torts, Sec. 757 Comment b (1939). From this the criterion of value to the
holder of the alleged secret arises, a criterion we have noted before. In Zoecon Industries, 713 F.2d at 1179, we
concluded that a customer list was a trade secret in part because the list gave to its owner an advantage "over
competitors who did not have this information." See also Lykes-Youngstown Corp., 504 F.2d at 535 ("[e]vidence
was adduced at trial that [the product in question] had unique capabilities and features which made it a valuable
competitive product").

27

Metallurgical met the burden of showing the value of its modifications. Lawrence Lorman, the company's vice
president, testified that the zinc recovery process gave Metallurgical an advantage over its two competitors by
aiding in the production of the highest quality reclaimed carbide powder. The quality of the powder, in fact,
makes it an alternative to the more costly virgin carbide. Lorman testified that customers regarded
Metallurgical's zinc reclaimed powder as a better product than that reclaimed by the coldstream process used by
others. This evidence clearly indicates that the modifications that led to the commercial operation of the zinc
recovery furnace provided a clear advantage over the competition.

28

Another requisite is the cost of developing the secret device or process. In Huffines' companion case, K & G Oil,
Tool & Service Co. v. G & G Fishing Tool Service, 158 Tex. 594, 314 S.W.2d 782, 790 (1958), the court recognized
the cost involved in developing the device in question; "[t]he record shows ... that much work and ingenuity have
been applied to the development of a practical and successful device." See also Zoecon Industries, 713 F.2d at
1179 ("even if the names and addresses were readily ascertainable through trade journals as the defendants
allege, the other information could be compiled only at considerable expense"). No question exists that
Metallurgical expended much time, effort, and money to make the necessary changes. It clearly has met the
burden of demonstrating the effort involved in making a complex manufacturing process work.

29

That the cost of devising the secret and the value the secret provides are criteria in the legal formulation of a
trade secret shows the equitable underpinnings of this area of the law. It seems only fair that one should be able
to keep and enjoy the fruits of his labor. If a businessman has worked hard, has used his imagination, and has
taken bold steps to gain an advantage over his competitors, he should be able to profit from his efforts. Because a
commercial advantage can vanish once the competition learns of it, the law should protect the businessman's
efforts to keep his achievements secret. As is discussed below, this is an area of law in which simple fairness still
plays a large role.

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 8 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

30

We do not say, however, that all these factors need exist in every case. Because each case must turn on its own
facts, no standard formula for weighing the factors can be devised. Secrecy is always required, of course, but
beyond that there are no universal requirements. In a future case, for example, should the defendant's breach of
confidence be particularly egregious, the injured party might still seek redress in court despite the possibility that
the subject matter was discovered at little or no cost or that the object of secrecy is not of great value to him. The
definition of "trade secret" will therefore be determined by weighing all equitable considerations. It is easy to
recognize the possibility of a trade secret here, however, because Metallurgical presented evidence of all three
factors discussed above.

31

Appellees posit two other reasons why Metallurgical's modification process cannot be defined as a trade secret.
The first is premised on characterizing the process in question as the installation of various devices all well
known to modern manufacturing. This being so, the argument runs, the process itself can be no secret, either.
The technologies of chill plates, multiple crucibles, pump filters, and unitary graphite heating elements are all
said to be public knowledge. This may well be so, but it does not prevent Metallurgical from seeking legal
protection. Ventura Manufacturing Co. v. Locke, 454 S.W.2d 431 (Tex.Civ.App.1970), involved a process of
finding and cleaning small yet valuable titanium scraps lost during the manufacturing of airplanes. Appellee
Locke refined a previously unsuccessful process by implementing new procedures, none of which was innovative.
The court nevertheless found that his efforts could constitute a trade secret:

32

Obviously, the basic proposition involved in the cleaning of dirty parts by commercial detergents involves no
trade secret. Also, the use of production line techniques as such must be considered as a matter of general
knowledge. On the other hand, we cannot say that the details of the procedure followed in the cleaning of these
fasteners are matters of general knowledge. To the contrary, the record demonstrates that such details as the
types and amounts of chemicals to be used and the times and temperatures for cleaning the fasteners were
developed by Ventura through extensive trial and error and at considerable expense.

33

Id. at 434. Similarly, in Sikes, 665 F.2d 731, 736, we quoted with approval the following passage from Water
Services, Inc. v. Tesco Chemicals, 410 F.2d 163, 173 (5th Cir.1969).3

34

It is clear that the theory of the Treat-A-Matic was not new to the industry. The court also found that the design
was apparent from inspection, and that the system had been sold and advertised without restriction. These
findings are supported by the evidence. But these findings are not conclusive. The trade secret here was the

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 9 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

application of known techniques and the assembly of available components to create the first successful system
in the industry.... As the Second Circuit stated in Imperial Chemical, Ltd. v. National Distillers & Chemical Corp.
(2 Cir.1965) 342 F.2d 737, 742, "a trade secret can exist in a combination of characteristics and components each
of which, by itself, is in the public domain, but the unified process, design and operation of which in unique
combination, affords a competitive advantage and is a protectible secret."

35

We believe these cases cogently refute appellees' assertions to the contrary.

36

The second defense advances a supposed concept of "negative know how" in reliance on one sentence from Hurst
v. Hughes Tool Co., 634 F.2d 895 (5th Cir.) cert. denied 454 U.S. 829, 102 S.Ct. 123, 70 L.Ed.2d 105 (1981). The
court there ruled that Hughes Tool Company did not really use the information Hurst provided; "Hurst's
information, while of some benefit, provided only negative, 'what not to do,' input to Hughes." Id. at 899. Both
the district court and Smith interpret this to mean that negative know-how cannot constitute a trade secret. The
sentence in Hurst, however, has nothing to do with whether the information was a trade secret. It is not found in
the section of the opinion dealing with the existence of a trade secret; rather, we were determining whether
Hughes Tool Company could be found to have used commercially any secrets Hurst conveyed.

37

Regardless of this misreading, the argument that negative know-how is involved here is unpersuasive. We do not
understand how the changes that we have described can be seen as only showing what not to do. Metallurgical's
evidence shows that it encountered many problems with the furnaces Therm-O-Vac delivered. Striving to solve
these problems, Metallurgical took several steps to modify the furnaces. Installing unitary heating elements, chill
plates, multiple crucibles, and pump filters are all "positive" steps resulting from conclusions on what to do.
These changes allegedly turned unuseuable furnaces into ones fit for commercial operation. One may say, of
course, that these actions result from realizations of what not to do; but so does every human process: the
selection of one action at a given moment involves the rejection of every other conceivable one that might have
been chosen. Using multiple crucibles, for example, stems from the conclusion that a single large crucible should
not be used. This characterization, however, can always describe the invention or modification of a device.
Knowing what not to do often leads automatically to knowing what to do. Although we decline to hold that this
distinction will always be unavailing, in this case at least we regard the distinction between "positive" and
"negative" knowledge to be unintelligible. Because this final claim of Smith is unpersuasive, we conclude that the
evidence which was presented at trial could have led a reasonable jury to believe a trade secret existed.

IV. EXISTENCE OF A CONFIDENTIAL RELATIONSHIP

38

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 10 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Deciding whether a confidential relationship existed between Metallurgical and Bielefeldt must naturally precede
an inquiry into his possible breach of Metallurgical's confidence. Once again, we look to the Restatement of Torts
as our starting point:

39

One who discloses or uses another's trade secrets, without a privilege to do so, is liable to the other if ... (b) his
disclosure or use constitutes a breach of confidence reposed in him by the other in disclosing the secret to him.

40

* * *

41

* * *

42

A breach of confidence under the rule stated in this Clause may also be a breach of contract which subjects the
actor to liability.... But whether or not there is a breach of contract, the rule stated in this Section subjects the
actor to liability if his disclosure or use of another's trade secret is a breach of the confidence reposed in him by
the other in disclosing the secret to him.

43

Huffines, 314 S.W.2d at 769, quoting Restatement, Sec. 757 and comment j. In Huffines, the Texas Court cited
several cases to emphasize this message. Quoted at great length was Adolph Gottscho v. American Marking
Corp., 18 N.J. 467, 114 A.2d 438 (1955). The Gottscho court stressed the blameworthy conduct of the defendant
as the basis of this tort:

44

[Defendants] now seek to appropriate these trade secrets to their own use and profit by a violation of their
contractual agreements and a betrayal of the confidence reposed in them by plaintiff. This they may not do; such
conduct is abhorrent to our conception of ordinary honesty.... Jackson learned the plaintiff's trade secrets in
confidence and, in violation of his fiduciary obligations, he disclosed and used them for purposes other than his
employer's benefit.... His conduct was grossly improper and gave rise to the plaintiff's cause of action, based on
long-settled equitable principles and supported by the marked changes in the attitude of the law towards the
need for commercial morality.

45

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 11 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

114 A.2d at 441-42, quoting Julius Hyman & Co. v. Velsicol Corp., 123 Colo. 563, 604-06, 233 P.2d 977, 999
(1952), cert. denied 342 U.S. 870, 72 S.Ct. 199, 96 L.Ed. 671 (1951). Our review of the evidence on the existence of
a confidential relationship is hampered to some degree by the district court's exclusion of several items of
evidence. As we discuss below, the exclusions were improper; but regardless of the evidence excluded, the record
contains testimony of Metallurgical's president, Ira Friedman, that he informed Bielefeldt of the confidentiality
Metallurgical expected. Although these references are few, they would have sufficed to allow a reasonable jury to
have believed that a confidential relationship existed between Metallurgical and Bielefeldt.

V. OBTAINING SECRETS FROM ANOTHER

46

At this point we must devote separate attention to Smith, which stands in a different light from Bielefeldt. It had
no significant dealings with Metallurgical and apparently was not heavily involved in the design of the furnace it
purchased. The question therefore becomes whether Smith as purchaser, and thus as beneficiary of Bielefeldt's
alleged misappropriation, can also be held liable for it.

47

The law imposes liability not only on those who wrongfully misappropriate trade secrets by breach of confidence
but also, in certain situations, on others who might benefit from the breach:

48

One who discloses or uses another's trade secret, without a privilege to do so, is liable to the other if ... (c) he
learned the secret from a third person with notice of the facts that it was a secret and that the third person's
disclosure of it was otherwise a breach of his duty to the other....

49

* * *

50

* * *

51

One has notice of facts under the rule stated in this Section when he knows of them or when he should know of
them.... He should know of them if, from the information which he has, a reasonable man would infer the facts in
question, or if, under the circumstances, a reasonable man would be put on inquiry and an inquiry pursued with
reasonable intelligence and diligence would disclose the facts.

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 12 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

52

Restatement, Sec. 757 & comment 1. Under this standard, we believe a reasonable jury could find that Smith
should have inquired into the relationship between Bielefeldt and Metallurgical. Testimony shows that, during
negotiations for the purchase of a furnace, Bielefeldt told Smith of his current involvement in then-pending
litigation with Metallurgical regarding trade secrets in New Jersey. Smith learned that Metallurgical claimed
ownership of the design and manufacturing processes of the zinc recovery furnace, a furnace which Smith wished
Bielefeldt to build. Apparently satisfied by Bielefeldt's assertion of the meritlessness of Metallurgical's claims,
Smith eventually gave him the go-ahead for construction of the furnace. There is no indication that it ever
investigated the danger that Bielefeldt was wrongfully misappropriating the ideas of others. The evidence as it
stood at the end of Metallurgical's presentation thus suggests that Smith knew of possible problems and did
nothing but rely on Bielefeldt's dismissals. We think that this inattention to possible wrongdoing, unless refuted,
amounts to a failure to reasonably inquire into the facts involved. Under Sec. 757(c), Smith might therefore be
held accountable, provided it used any trade secrets conveyed. This brings us to the next issue.

VI. DISCLOSURE OR USE OF A TRADE SECRET

53

Wrongful misappropriation occurs if one "discloses or uses another's trade secret without a privilege to do so...."
Restatement, Sec. 757. The district court directed verdict for appellees in part because it saw no evidence of
Bielefeldt's actual use or disclosure of Metallurgical's secrets. In reviewing this conclusion, we keep in mind the
rule of Boeing Co. v. Shipman by scouring the record for reasonable inferences favorable to Metallurgical. One
fact jumps out from this review: in their original form, the furnaces delivered to Metallurgical differed from those
that Smith purchased. The former furnaces lacked the key features needed to achieve commercial operation,
while the latter possessed those features--features that Metallurgical had devised by extensive and expensive trial
and error. Bielefeldt himself testified that he did not look to public sources of information in designing the Smith
furnace; he instead claimed that he relied on his memory. That his earlier efforts lacked the features at issue
suggests that his "memories" may well have been of working with Metallurgical. This issue is therefore an
inappropriate ground for a directed verdict.

54

Smith's liability can arise, however, only if it in turn used the secrets gained from Bielefeldt. "Use," as it turns out,
is not so easily defined. Smith claims that it never used any secrets gained because its inability to procure
substantial quantities of scrap carbide prevented commercial operation of the furnace Fourtek provided. Lykes-
Youngstown, 504 F.2d 518, guides us in determining commercial use. We must first recognize the unfortunate
blurring of analyses in that case. The Lykes-Youngstown court's discussion of commercial use was in the context
of inquiring whether damages might be available. It is preferable, of course, to divorce these concepts.
Commercial use is an element of the tort as enounced in Sec. 757 of the Restatement; while the nature of the use
may be relevant in determining the proper extent of damages, its existence must also be shown to establish
wrongdoing in the first place. Despite this confusion, Lykes-Youngstown provides useful analysis.

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 13 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

55

Metallurgical looked to that case in arguing that the law provides a liberal definition of "commercial use." Lykes-
Youngstown does indeed state a broad definition; "any misappropriation, followed by an exercise of control and
dominion ... must constitute a commercial use...." 504 F.2d at 542. Lykes-Youngstown differs from our case,
however, in one very important respect. It was a case in which "the trade secret itself was what was to be sold...."
Id. at 540. The court there explicitly contrasted a case like ours, "where the trade secret is used to improve
manufacturing, and subsequently manufactured items were sold at a profit...." Id. Although the court made this
distinction in determining the proper method of computing damages, we think it also applies logically to
developing a definition of "use." The discussion in Lykes-Youngstown following this distinction is therefore
inapposite to our case, for which we instead employ the everyday meaning of the term. If Smith has not put the
furnace into commercial operation to produce carbide powder it can then use, then no commercial use has
occurred. Because Metallurgical failed to provide any evidence that Smith has so far benefitted from any
misappropriation, directed verdict in Smith's favor was proper. Should it in future seek to profit from use or sale
of the furnace, a new fact situation will be presented.

VII. EVIDENTIARY MATTERS

56

We now turn our attention to certain evidentiary rulings the district court made to exclude various documentary
and testimonial items of evidence. At trial, Metallurgical offered Exhibit 246 in evidence; entitled "Non-
Disclosure Agreement" and dated June 11, 1976, this document predates any purchase agreement between
Metallurgical and Therm-O-Vac. In it, Bielefeldt agreed to hold all information gained from Metallurgical in
confidence, using or disclosing this knowledge only with Metallurgical's approval.4 On July 30, 1976,
Metallurgical and Therm-O-Vac signed the purchase order for the first furnace. Entered into evidence as Exhibit
826, the order form contained two clauses of significance here: an integration clause5 and one entitled "Property
Interest."6 An analogous pair of documents also surrounds the purchase of the second furnace. Exhibits 247 and
247A are different copies of a Non-Disclosure Agreement dated March 1, 1978. Also signed by Bielefeldt, this
agreement provided detailed recognition of the confidentiality involved and the expectation of nondisclosure
absent Metallurgical's permission.7 On January 31, 1979, the parties signed the purchase order for the second
furnace; this document, received in evidence as Exhibit 57, contained integration and nondisclosure provisions
identical to those of Exhibit 826.

57

The district court eventually withdrew exhibits 246, 247, and 247A from evidence because of Texas' parol
evidence rule, holding that the integration clauses of exhibits 826 and 57 "abrogated all prior agreements
between the parties." The Texas parol evidence rule bars evidence of a prior or contemporaneous agreement that
contradicts or changes the express terms of an unambiguous written agreement. See, e.g., Caviness Packing Co.,
Inc. v. Corbett, 587 S.W.2d 543, 545 (Tex.Civ.App.--Amarillo 1979, writ ref. n.r.e.). If Metallurgical were suing
only on the contract, then the parol evidence rule unquestionably would bar evidence of prior agreements. This is

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 14 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:27 PM

not the case, however; the cause of action we are addressing on appeal is independent of any contract. See
Huffines, 314 S.W.2d at 769. Even if the parties had not executed the purchase agreements, Metallurgical could
have sued for misappropriation of its trade secrets. Exhibits 246, 247 and 247A are relevant in showing that this
tort occurred. They were offered to show the parties' recognition of the unique nature of the zinc recovery process
and the confidential relationship then existing; their purpose was not to change or undermine the agreements
embodied in the purchase order. We regard their significance as stemming from legal concepts completely
independent of any contractual relationship,8 their consequences, moreover, do not impinge upon the legal effect
of that relationship. We thus conclude that the exclusion of these exhibits was an abuse of the district court's
discretion.

58

The district court also excluded certain testimony of Friedman, Bielefeldt, and Paul Durkin, a former employee of
Metallurgical. Because these exclusions were also premised on the applicability of the parol evidence rule, they
too were improper. On appeal, appellees argue that the testimony was cumulative anyway, but we are
unconvinced. On retrial, therefore, testimony about the parties' understanding of confidentiality existing before
the purchase order agreements should not be excluded because of the parol evidence rule.

59

We may not disturb the district court's exclusion of the evidence, however, if that ruling can be upheld on other
grounds, regardless of whether the court relied on those grounds. Fed.R.Evid. 103 requires a finding of error to
be based on the exclusion of evidence only if "a substantial right of the party is affected." If other grounds exist
supporting the evidence's exclusion, the district court's reliance on the parol evidence rule can constitute only
harmless error. See United Communications, Inc. v. American Television & Communications Corp., 536 F.2d
1310, 1318 n. 6 (10th Cir.1976); 11 Wright & Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil Sec. 2885 (1973). It is
thus necessary to address the best evidence rule and authentication challenges Bielefeldt raises regarding
exhibits 247 and 247A. At trial, the court expressed concern about whether these exhibits satisfied the best
evidence rule, but eventually did not base their exclusion on the rule. Bielefeldt now maintains, as he maintained
at trial, that the exhibits' authenticity was insufficiently confirmed and that the exhibits were inaccurate copies of
the original, which has apparently been lost.

60

Exhibit 247 is a poorly-xeroxed copy of the March 1, 1978 nondisclosure agreement. Because parts of the copy
were difficult to read, Metallurgical introduced into evidence Exhibit 247A, a more legible reproduction. Both
copies have unintelligible markings on the lower left hand corner. The markings do not cover the agreement's
text or Bielefeldt's signature. Because they do not appear to alter or modify the typed text of the agreement, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to see how their presence can affect the case in any way. While these markings might
distinguish the copies from the original document, the alteration seems of a most trivial kind. The record
therefore reveals no genuine issue as to the authenticity of the copies' contents; no suggestion of unfairness
arises, moreover, by admitting the copies into evidence. The copies should not be excluded because of some

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 15 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:27 PM

small, unintelligible markings that apparently have nothing to do with the issues of this case. Rather, these
markings should go to only the weight attached to the exhibits. See Greater Kansas City Laborers Pension Fund v.
Thummel, 738 F.2d 926, 928 (8th Cir.1984).

61

Authentication of Exhibit 247 came from the testimony of Ira Friedman, who claimed to have been present when
Bielefeldt signed the document. No testimony, however, authenticated Exhibit 247A. That exhibit appears to be a
slightly enlarged and clearer copy of either the original or Exhibit 247. Authentication of Bielefeldt's signature
can be made by comparing it to that of Exhibit 247, already authenticated. Had the case gone to the jury, it could
have assumed this task. See Fed.R.Evid. 901(b)(3). We therefore refuse to affirm the ruling excluding these
exhibits' exclusion on any other ground.

VIII. REMEDIES AND OTHER MATTERS

62

We now come to the issue of remedies available to Metallurgical. The district court apparently found crucial
Smith's inability to operate its furnace profitably. Because there was no commercial use, it concluded that
damages were unavailable. We have already concluded that Smith did not "use" the alleged secrets Bielefeldt
provided; to say that this circumstance precludes all remedies goes too far, however. The court failed to
distinguish consideration of the individual appellees; Smith is out of the picture, but Bielefeldt remains. Should
he be found liable on retrial, the appropriate damages should be based on the tenets of Lykes-Youngstown. We
there adopted the concept of the "reasonable royalty." This does not mean a simple percentage of actual profits;
instead, the trier of fact, should it find Bielefeldt liable, must determine "the actual value of what has been
appropriated." 504 F.2d at 537, quoting Vitro Corp. v. Hall Chemical Co., 292 F.2d 678, 683 (6th Cir.1961). We
later expounded this concept:

63

[T]he proper measure is to calculate what the parties would have agreed to as a fair price for licensing the
defendant to put the trade secret to the use the defendants intended at the time the misappropriation took place.

64

In calculating what a fair licensing price would have been had the parties agreed, the trier of fact should consider
such factors as the resulting and foreseeable changes in the parties' competitive posture; the prices past
purchasers or licensees may have paid; the total value of the secret to the plaintiff, including the plaintiff's
development cost and the importance of the secret to the plaintiff's business; the nature and extent of the use the
defendant intended for the secret, and finally whatever other unique factors in the particular case might have
been affected by the parties' agreement, such as the ready availability of alternative process.

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 16 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:27 PM

65

Id. at 540. Estimation of damages, however, should not be based on sheer speculation. If too few facts exist to
permit the trier of fact to calculate proper damages, then a reasonable remedy in law is unavailable. In that
instance, a permanent injunction is a proper remedy for the breach of a confidential relationship. Zoecon
Industries, 713 F.2d at 1180, citing Huffines, 314 S.W.2d at 778. In this case, moreover, an injunction against
Bielefeldt in no way depends on whether Smith achieved commercial use. Should Metallurgical prove its point on
retrial, therefore, it has a remedy available to right the wrong done it.

66

We emphasize the limited consequences of today's decision. In no way do we pass judgment on whether
Bielefeldt committed any wrong; that task is for the trier of fact. We hold only that the opportunity for this
determination to be made must be given. It may be that on retrial Bielefeldt can successfully show that his
knowledge came from somewhere else or that the process of modification was no secret.

67

We conclude by recognizing the other appellees in this case. Our decision has focused exclusively on Bielefeldt
and Smith. Metallurgical, however, also named the other officers of Fourtek as appellees.9 It thereby forced
Norman Montesino, Gary Boehm, and Michael Sarvadi to file an appellate brief. Only in their brief do we learn
that Metallurgical itself moved to dismiss all counts against these three, a motion which the court granted. No
evidence in the case was presented against them. Only in Metallurgical's reply brief, moreover, do we discover
that "Metallurgical does not urge this appeal as to Montesino, Boehm, and Sarvadi...." We regard the naming of
these three as appellees, thus forcing them to submit a brief, as constituting a frivolous appeal. We therefore
award attorney's fees and single costs to Montesino, Boehm, and Sarvadi in accordance with Fed.R.App.P. 38. On
remand, they are to submit their claims for fees to the district court.

68

The district court's order is AFFIRMED in part, REVERSED in part, and the cause is REMANDED.

1

Hereafter referred to simply as "carbide"

2

Metallurgical is a New Jersey corporation. The individual appellees reside in Texas, and Fourtek is a Texas
corporation. Smith is a California corporation having a Texas office

3

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 17 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:27 PM

Tesco, to be sure, concerns Georgia law, but Georgia, like Texas, recognizes the Restatement definition of trade
secret; and we think our language there apposite here." Sikes, 665 F.2d at 736

4

The document provides as follows:

The undersigned hereby agrees that what they [sic] witness and all information, either written or orally received
during visit to M.I., and relating to Metallurgical International products, manufacturing procedures, or
equipment will be held in confidence, and will not be transmitted, used or disclosed to, any person or
organization without the express written approval of Metallurgical International.

5

Entitled "Other Understandings," this provision states in part:

All previous communication between the parties hereto, either oral or written, with reference to this proposal, is
hereby abrogated, it being understood that there are no agreements, understandings or guarantees whatever
other than contained in this proposal and supplements thereto.

6

This clause reads as follows:

It is understood that portions of the design of the equipment covered by this proposal may be of proprietary
nature to one or both parties. It is agreed that neither PURCHASER nor Therm-O-Vac will disclose design
features of the equipment to third parties without prior written agreement.

7

Recitation of the entire document is necessary to show the extent of the parties' expectations:

WHEREAS, Therm-O-Vac Engineering and Manufacturing, Inc. has constructed a zinc reclamation process for
the recovery of tungsten carbide cobalt for Metallurgical International, Inc., based on specifications developed by
the mutual efforts of Therm-O-Vac and Metallurgical; and

WHEREAS, from the date of the installation of the zinc reclamation process Metallurgical has modified same
based on the experience of Metallurgical with the use of the zinc reclamation process; and

WHEREAS, Metallurgical has purchased the zinc reclamation process from Therm-O-Vac;

NOW, THEREFORE, Therm-O-Vac agrees with Metallurgical to hold all information concerning the zinc

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 18 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:27 PM

reclamation process confidential and further agrees to refrain from manufacturing, using or selling the zinc
reclamation process or any information concerning same which is in any way similar to the zinc reclamation
process developed and constructed for Metallurgical to any other person, firm or corporation unless and until
permission to do so is received in writing from Metallurgical International, Inc.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Therm-O-Vac Engineering and Manufacturing, Inc. has caused these promises to be
executed by its respective representative and caused its respective signature to be affixed hereto.

/s/ Erwin Bielefeldt

8

A possible response to this argument is that, while the tort of misappropriating a trade secret is theoretically
distinct from a cause of action on the contract, in this case the tort is swallowed by the subsequent contractual
agreements; therefore, the response would run, the parol evidence rule remains applicable in governing the
admissibility of evidence. To accept this position, however, would require us to deny in the first place to
Metallurgical a cause of action based on breach of confidence. Because the entire dispute would be contractual,
duties imposed by tort law would become irrelevant. This consequence is contrary to the Restatement's
philosophy that contractual duties are irrelevant in dealing with a breach of confidence. Cf. Hendricks v. Wall,
277 S.W. 207 (Tex.Civ.App.--El Paso 1925, writ ref'd) (a contract intending or inducing a fiduciary's breach of
trust is void). As discussed earlier, the language of Huffines strongly emphasizes the importance of providing tort
liability as a way of promoting business honesty and commercial fairness. Influenced by such emphatic
statements, we are unwilling to let this cause of action die because of the presence of contracts. Instead, we
acknowledge the possible importance of any agreements in proving or disproving a requisite element(s) of the
tort and providing an independent basis for a contractual cause of action

9

Fourtek, Inc. was also named as appellee but it has gone into bankruptcy

Bloomberg Law - Request a Free Trial Today

Advertisement

Print
Email

Short URL:
Advertisement

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 19 of 22

Integrated Legal Research & Business Intelligence: 24/7 Support Go tobna.com/Bloomberg-Law790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:27 PM

Top Local Lawyers

Scott Leventhal
DUI-DWI, Accident & Injury,
Criminal, Workers'
Compensation

New Haven, CT

see profile

Learn more about Lawyer.com Membership

Advertisement

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 20 of 22

790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:27 PM

Bloomberg
Law - Request
a Free Trial
Today

Like Share 1.4K people like this.

OpenJurist

Follow

+1

+ 14

Home
Federal Reporter, Second Series

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 21 of 22

Integrated LegalResearch & BusinessIntelligence: 24/7Supportbna.com790 F2d 1195 Metallurgical Industries Inc v. Fourtek Inc | OpenJurist

5/7/17, 1:27 PM

790 F.2d.

Home

Browse OpenJurist

Learn the Law

Terms of Use

http://openjurist.org/790/f2d/1195/metallurgical-industries-inc-v-fourtek-inc

Page 22 of 22

