Bette Midler, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. Ford Motor Company, a Dela-

ware Corporation, and Young & Rubicam Inc., a New York Corpora-

tion, Defendants-Appellees 

No. 87-6168 

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS   

FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT 

849 F.2d 460; 1988 U.S. App. LEXIS 8424; 7 U.S.P.Q.2D (BNA) 1398; 

Copy. L. Rep. (CCH) P26,313; 15 Media L. Rep. 1620 

February 4, 1988, Argued and Submitted     

June 22, 1988, Filed   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
COUNSEL: Peter Laird, Los Angeles, California, for the Plaintiff-Appellant.   
 
Robert M. Callagy, New York, New York, for the Defendants-Appellees.     
 
JUDGES:    Procter Hug, Jr., Thomas Tang and John T. Noonan, Jr., Circuit Judges.     
 
OPINION BY: NOONAN   
 
OPINION 

  [*461]    JOHN T. NOONAN, Circuit Judge:   
This case centers on the protectibility of the voice of a celebrated chanteuse from commercial 
exploitation without her consent. Ford Motor Company and its advertising agency, Young & Rubi-
cam, Inc., in 1985 advertised the Ford Lincoln Mercury with a series of nineteen 30 or 60 second 
television commercials in what the agency called "The Yuppie Campaign." The aim was to make an 
emotional connection with Yuppies, bringing back memories of when they were in college. Differ-
ent popular songs of the seventies were sung on each commercial. The agency tried to get "the 
original people," that is, the singers who had popularized the songs, to sing them. Failing in that 
endeavor in ten cases the agency had the songs sung by "sound alikes." Bette Midler, the plaintiff 
and appellant here,    [**2]    was done by a sound alike.   

Midler is a nationally known actress and singer. She won a Grammy as early as 1973 as the Best 

New Artist of that year. Records made by her since then have gone Platinum and Gold. She was 
nominated in 1979 for an Academy award for Best Female Actress in The Rose, in which she por-
trayed a pop singer. Newsweek in its June 30, 1986 issue described her as an "outrageously original 
singer/comedian." Time hailed her in its March 2, 1987 issue as "a legend" and "the most dynamic 
and poignant singer-actress of her time."   

When Young & Rubicam was preparing the Yuppie Campaign it presented the commercial to 
its client by playing an edited version of Midler singing "Do You Want To Dance," taken from the 

 

 

1973 Midler album, "The Divine Miss M." After the client accepted the idea and form of the com-
mercial, the agency contacted Midler's manager, Jerry Edelstein. The conversation went as follows: 
"Hello, I am Craig Hazen from Young and Rubicam. I am calling you to find out if Bette Midler 
would be interested in doing . . .? Edelstein: "Is it a commercial?" "Yes." "We are not interested."   
Undeterred, Young & Rubicam sought out Ula Hedwig whom it knew to have [**3]    been one 
of "the Harlettes" a backup singer for Midler for ten years. Hedwig was told by Young & Rubicam 
that "they wanted someone who could sound like Bette Midler's recording of [Do You Want To 
Dance]." She was asked to make a "demo" tape of the song if she was interested. She made an a 
capella demo and got the job.   

At the direction of Young & Rubicam, Hedwig then made a record for the commercial. The 

Midler record of "Do You Want To Dance" was first played to her. She was told to "sound as much 
as possible like the Bette Midler record," leaving out only a few "aahs" unsuitable for the commer-
cial. Hedwig imitated Midler to the best of her ability.   

After the commercial was aired Midler was told by "a number of people" that it    [*462]   

"sounded exactly" like her record of "Do You Want To Dance." Hedwig was told by "many per-
sonal friends" that they thought it was Midler singing the commercial. Ken Fritz, a personal man-
ager in the entertainment business not associated with Midler, declares by affidavit that he heard the 
commercial on more than one occasion and thought Midler was doing the singing.   

Neither the name nor the picture of Midler was used in the commercial; Young & Rubicam had 
a [**4]    license from the copyright holder to use the song. At issue in this case is only the protec-
tion of Midler's voice. The district court described the defendants' conduct as that "of the average 
thief." They decided, "If we can't buy it, we'll take it." The court nonetheless believed there was no 
legal principle preventing imitation of Midler's voice and so gave summary judgment for the defen-
dants. Midler appeals.   

The First Amendment protects much of what the media do in the reproduction of likenesses or 
sounds. A primary value is freedom of speech and press.    Time, Inc. v. Hill, 385 U.S. 374, 388, 17 
L. Ed. 2d 456, 87 S. Ct. 534 (1967). The purpose of the media's use of a person's identity is central. 
If the purpose is "informative or cultural" the use is immune; "if it serves no such function but 
merely exploits the individual portrayed, immunity will not be granted." Felcher and Rubin, "Pri-
vacy, Publicity and the Portrayal of Real People by the Media," 88 Yale L.J. 1577, 1596 (1979). 
Moreover, federal copyright law preempts much of the area. "Mere imitation of a recorded per-
formance would not constitute a copyright infringement even where one performer deliberately sets 
out to simulate another's performance as    [**5]    exactly as possible." Notes of Committee on the 
Judiciary, 17 U.S.C.A. ß 114(b). It is in the context of these First Amendment and federal copyright 
distinctions that we address the present appeal.   

Nancy Sinatra once sued Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company on the basis of an advertising 
campaign by Young & Rubicam featuring "These Boots Are Made For Walkin'," a song closely 
identified with her; the female singers of the commercial were alleged to have imitated her voice 
and style and to have dressed and looked like her. The basis of Nancy Sinatra's complaint was un-
fair competition; she claimed that the song and the arrangement had acquired "a secondary mean-
ing" which, under California law, was protectible. This court noted that the defendants "had paid a 
very substantial sum to the copyright proprietor to obtain the license for the use of the song and all 
of its arrangements." To give Sinatra damages for their use of the song would clash with federal 

 

 

copyright law. Summary judgment for the defendants was affirmed.    Sinatra v. Goodyear Tire & 
Rubber Co., 435 F.2d 711, 717-718 (9th Cir. 1970), cert. denied, 402 U.S. 906, 28 L. Ed. 2d 646, 91 
S. Ct. 1376 (1971). If Midler were claiming a secondary meaning to "Do    [**6]    You Want To 
Dance" or seeking to prevent the defendants from using that song, she would fail like Sinatra. But 
that is not this case. Midler does not seek damages for Ford's use of "Do You Want To Dance," and 
thus her claim is not preempted by federal copyright law. Copyright protects "original works of 
authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression." 17 U.S.C. ß 102(a). A voice is not copy-
rightable. The sounds are not "fixed." What is put forward as protectible here is more personal than 
any work of authorship.   

Bert Lahr once sued Adell Chemical Co. for selling Lestoil by means of a commercial in which 

an imitation of Lahr's voice accompanied a cartoon of a duck. Lahr alleged that his style of vocal 
delivery was distinctive in pitch, accent, inflection, and sounds. The First Circuit held that Lahr had 
stated a cause of action for unfair competition, that it could be found "that defendant's conduct 
saturated plaintiff's audience, curtailing his market." Lahr v. Adell Chemical Co., 300 F.2d 256, 259 
(1st Cir. 1962). That case is more like this one. But we do not find unfair competition here. 
One-minute commercials of the sort the defendants put on would not have saturated [**7]   
Midler's audience and curtailed her market. Midler did not do television commercials. The defen-
dants were not in competition    [*463]    with her. See Halicki v. United Artists Communications, 
Inc., 812 F.2d 1213 (9th Cir. 1987).   

California Civil Code section 3344 is also of no aid to Midler. The statute affords damages to a 
person injured by another who uses the person's "name, voice, signature, photograph or likeness, in 
any manner." The defendants did not use Midler's name or anything else whose use is prohibited by 
the statute. The voice they used was Hedwig's, not hers. The term "likeness" refers to a visual image 
not a vocal imitation. The statute, however, does not preclude Midler from pursuing any cause of 
action she may have at common law; the statute itself implies that such common law causes of ac-
tion do exist because it says its remedies are merely "cumulative." Id. ß 3344(g).   

The companion statute protecting the use of a deceased person's name, voice, signature, photo-
graph or likeness states that the rights it recognizes are "property rights." Id. ß 990(b). By analogy 
the common law rights are also property rights. Appropriation of such common law rights is a tort 
in    [**8]    California.    Motschenbacher v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 498 F.2d 821 (9th Cir. 
1974). In that case what the defendants used in their television commercial for Winston cigarettes 
was a photograph of a famous professional racing driver's racing car. The number of the car was 
changed and a wing-like device known as a "spoiler" was attached to the car; the car's features of 
white pinpointing, an oval medallion, and solid red coloring were retained. The driver, Lothar 
Motschenbacher, was in the car but his features were not visible. Some persons, viewing the com-
mercial, correctly inferred that the car was his and that he was in the car and was therefore endors-
ing the product. The defendants were held to have invaded a "proprietary interest" of Motschen-
bacher in his own identity.    Id. at 825.   

Midler's case is different from Motschenbacher's. He and his car were physically used by the 
tobacco company's ad; he made part of his living out of giving commercial endorsements. But, as 
Judge Koelsch expressed it in Motschenbacher, California will recognize an injury from "an appro-
priation of the attributes of one's identity." Id. at 824. It was irrelevant that Motschenbacher could 
not [**9]    be identified in the ad. The ad suggested that it was he. The ad did so by emphasizing 

 

 

signs or symbols associated with him. In the same way the defendants here used an imitation to 
convey the impression that Midler was singing for them.   

Why did the defendants ask Midler to sing if her voice was not of value to them? Why did they 
studiously acquire the services of a sound-alike and instruct her to imitate Midler if Midler's voice 
was not of value to them? What they sought was an attribute of Midler's identity. Its value was what 
the market would have paid for Midler to have sung the commercial in person.   

A voice is more distinctive and more personal than the automobile accouterments protected in 

Motschenbacher. A voice is as distinctive and personal as a face. The human voice is one of the 
most palpable ways identity is manifested. We are all aware that a friend is at once known by a few 
words on the phone. At a philosophical level it has been observed that with the sound of a voice, 
"the other stands before me." D. Ihde, Listening and Voice 77 (1976). A fortiori, these observations 
hold true of singing, especially singing by a singer of renown. The singer manifests herself in 
[**10]    the song. To impersonate her voice is to pirate her identity. See W. Keeton, D. Dobbs, R. 
Keeton, D. Owen, Prosser & Keeton on Torts 852 (5th ed. 1984).   

We need not and do not go so far as to hold that every imitation of a voice to advertise mer-

chandise is actionable. We hold only that when a distinctive voice of a professional singer is widely 
known and is deliberately imitated in order to sell a product, the sellers have appropriated what is 
not theirs and have committed a tort in California. Midler has made a showing, sufficient to defeat 
summary judgment, that the defendants here for their own    [*464]    profit in selling their product 
did appropriate part of her identity.   

REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR TRIAL.     

 

 

