The MURPHY DOOR BED CO., INC. v. INTERIOR SLEEP SYSTEMS, INC. 

 

874 F.2d 95 (2d Cir. 1989) 

Before LUMBARD and MINER, Circuit Judges, and SPRIZZO, District Judge.∗ 

MINER, Circuit Judge: 

Defendants-appellants appeal from a judgment entered in the United States District Court 
for  the  Eastern  District  of  New  York  (Mishler,  J.),  awarding  plaintiff,  the  Murphy  Door  Bed 
Company ("Murphy" or "Murphy Co."), $6330 with interest in damages for breach of contract, 
$801,161  in  compensatory  damages  and  $25,000  in  punitive  damages  for  trademark 
infringement and unfair competition. The judgment includes a permanent injunction enjoining all 
defendants from use of the Murphy name. 

Murphy is incorporated in New York and has its principal place of business there. Each 
of  the  defendant  corporations  is  incorporated  either  in  Florida  or  Georgia  and  each  has  its 
principal place of business in the state where it is incorporated. Defendant Frank Zarcone is a 
citizen  of  Florida.  Jurisdiction  therefore  properly  was  invoked  in  the  district  court  under  the 
diversity of citizenship statute, 28 U.S.C. § 1332. The district court determined that defendants 
had committed a breach of contract by failing to pay for goods received, and by using the name 
Murphy  bed  without  authorization,  such  use  having  also  been  found  to  constitute  trademark 
infringement  and  unfair  competition.  The  damages  were  assessed  against  defendants  Frank 
Zarcone and Interior Sleep Systems, Inc. ("ISS"). The $6330 award apparently is not contested 
on appeal. Plaintiff cross-appeals from the judgment, seeking to subject defendants Murphy Bed 
Co. of America, Inc. in Georgia ("MBCA Ga.") and Murphy Bed Co. of America, Inc. in Florida 
("MBCA Fl.") to the damages awards. 

We hold that "Murphy bed" is a generic term, having been appropriated by the public to 
designate  generally  a  type  of  bed.  Consequently,  defendants  could  not  have  infringed  on 
plaintiff's trademark, alleged to be Murphy bed, and the district court erred in finding trademark 
infringement.  We  agree  with  the  district  court,  however,  that  defendants  breached  their 
contractual  obligation  to  refrain  from  using  the  term  Murphy  bed  after  termination  of  their 
distribution  agreement  with  the  Murphy  Co.  Further,  we  agree  with  the  district  court  that 
defendants engaged in unfair competition by passing off beds of their own manufacture as beds 
of  the  Murphy  Co.  Accordingly,  we  affirm  the  court's  entry  of  a  permanent  injunction 
prohibiting defendants from use of the term Murphy bed. 

As to remedy for damage to Murphy by trademark infringement and unfair competition, 
the district court, constrained by a stipulation of the parties to limit compensatory damages to 
defendants'  profits  gained  from  improper  use  of  the  Murphy  name,  awarded  plaintiff 
compensatory damages based on defendants' gross profits. We hold that in awarding damages 
for unfair competition — damages for trademark infringement are inappropriate in this case — 
defendants'  profits  should  be  calculated  by  deducting  all  costs  attributable  to  items  sold  in 
violation  of  plaintiff's  rights.  Accordingly,  we  remand  the  case  for  recalculation  of  damages 

                                                 
∗ Hon. John E. Sprizzo, United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, sitting by designation. 

 

1 

based on defendants' net profits. Additionally, because the punitive damages award was based on 
findings  of  trademark  infringement  as  well  as  unfair  competition,  without  apportionment,  we 
remand the case for reformulation of punitive damages. Finally, we do not decide the issue raised 
on cross-appeal, because the extent of the judgment's coverage now may be properly specified by 
the district court. 

 

BACKGROUND 

At the turn of this century, William Lawrence Murphy invented and manufactured a bed 
that  when  not  in  use  could  be  concealed  in  a  wall  closet.  By  using  a  counter-balancing 
mechanism, the bed could be lowered from or raised to a closet in a wall to which the bed is 
hinged. In 1918, the United States Patent Office granted Mr. Murphy a patent for a "pivot bed," 
which was substantially similar to the wall bed. Mr. Murphy incorporated in New York in 1925 
as the Murphy Door Bed Company and began to sell the wall bed under the name of "Murphy 
bed." Since its inception, the Murphy Co. has used the words Murphy and Murphy bed as its 
trademark  for  concealed  beds.  Other  manufacturers  of  wall  beds  generally  describe  their 
products as "wall beds," "concealed beds," "disappearing beds," "authentic adjustable hydraulic 
beds"  and  the  like,  but  rarely  as  Murphy  beds.  In  fact,  at  least  twice,  when  independent 
companies marketed their products as Murphy beds, Murphy complained to them and, as a result, 
the companies refrained from further deliberate use of the term Murphy bed. 

On March 23, 1981, and again on November 16, 1982, the Patent and Trademark Office 
("PTO") denied the Murphy Co.'s application to register the Murphy bed trademark. The PTO 
examining  attorney  explained  that  the  words  "Murphy  bed"  had  become  generic  and  that  the 
phrase Murphy bed was "merely descriptive of a characteristic of the goods." In August 1984, 
the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board ("TTAB") affirmed the denial of registration. See In re 
Murphy Door Bed Co., Inc., 223 U.S.P.Q. 1030 (T.T.A.B.1984). The TTAB noted that "Murphy 
bed has for a long period of time been used by a substantial segment of the public as a generic 
term for a bed which folds into a wall or a closet." Id. at 1033. 

In  December  1981,  Frank  Zarcone,  on  behalf  of  ISS  and  himself,  entered  into  a 
distributorship  agreement  with  the  Murphy  Co.  and  became  the  exclusive  distributor  of  the 
Murphy  bed  in  the  four  Florida  counties  of  Broward,  Dade,  Palm  Beach  and  Monroe.  The 
agreement, in the form of a letter signed by both Murphy and Zarcone, provided in part that: 

4) ... Interior Sleep Systems will pay for material purchased within 30 days of date of 

Murphy's invoice.... 

5) — Whenever the Murphy name is used, it must be in capital letters and identified by 
the  word  trademark  or  TM  adjacent  to  Murphy.  Cabinets  or  other  material  not  furnished  by 
Murphy will not be promoted or sold as Murphy products. 

. . . . . 
8)  —  Upon  termination  of  this  agreement  Interior  Sleep  Systems,  Inc.  agrees  to 

discontinue the use of the name "Murphy bed". 

After learning of the TTAB's 1984 decision denying Murphy's application for trademark 
registration, Zarcone formed MBCA Ga. in December 1985, and MBCA Fl. in February 1986. In 

 

2 

addition, Zarcone obtained a telephone listing in New York City under the name "Murphy Bed 
Company." 

On March 20, 1986, Magnolia Builders ("Magnolia") of Pensacola, Florida ordered 109 
Murphy beds, Model SL 60/80, from MBCA Fl. Zarcone previously had filled similar Magnolia 
orders  with  beds  of  the  Murphy  Co.  To  fill  this  order,  however,  Zarcone  delivered  beds 
designated as Murphy bed Model SL 60/80 but that were, in fact, manufactured by one of his 
companies. 

Thereafter, Zarcone ordered from the Murphy Co. forty-eight Murphy beds, which were 
delivered with an invoice on May 21, 1986. Zarcone habitually paid Murphy sixty to ninety days 
after being billed, for which he always was charged interest of 1½% for each month that payment 
was overdue. On this occasion, however, more than ninety days passed without payment and so, 
on  August  21,  1986,  Zarcone  was  served  by  ordinary  mail  a  notice  of  cancellation  of  the 
distribution agreement. Zarcone denies receipt of the letter. Murphy then notified Zarcone by a 
letter sent by certified mail, dated September 24, 1986 and received by Zarcone on September 30, 
1986, that in keeping with paragraph 8 of the agreement, Zarcone was within "ten (10) days from 
receipt of this letter to remove the name `Murphy Bed' from all signs, vehicles, billboards, and 
all advertising." Despite receipt of this second letter, Zarcone continued to advertise regularly in 
south Florida using the Murphy name, including describing his product as "Murphy Bed Co. of 
America, Inc. — Original Wall-Bed Systems" and "The New Murphy Beds ... Original Wall Bed 
Systems." 

Murphy  initiated  this  action  on  December  19,  1986,  seeking  compensation,  punitive 
damages,  and  injunctive  relief  based  on  claims  of:  (i)  trademark  infringement,  (ii)  unfair 
competition and (iii) breach of contract. Defendants denied the allegations of the complaint and 
asserted, inter alia, four affirmative defenses: (i) equitable estoppel, (ii) failure of consideration 
in  forming  the  distribution  contract,  (iii)  fraud  in  the  inducement  of  the  contract  and  (iv)  res 
judicata and collateral estoppel by reason of the TTAB's denial of registration. 

A bench trial was held and in a decision and order dated May 13, 1988, the district court 
found for the Murphy Co. on all counts. First, the court ruled that the name Murphy was not 
generic because a "secondary meaning" had been attributed to it by the general public, and that 
the common law of trademark therefore protected the Murphy Co. Thus, the court held that the 
burden was on the defendants to show abandonment of the Murphy trademark — i.e. that the 
trademark  had  lost  its  significance.  The  court  then  found  that  defendants  did  not  sustain  their 
burden.  

Second,  the  court  held  that,  with  the  sale  of  the  109  beds  to  Magnolia  and  the  post-
contract  termination  advertisements  using  the  word  "original,"  Zarcone  had  engaged  in  unfair 
competition by passing off products of his own manufacture as those of the Murphy Co. Third, 
the  court  held  that  because  Zarcone  had  used  the  name  Murphy  after  termination  of  the 
distributorship  agreement,  he  had  committed  breach  of  contract.  Finally,  the  court  rejected 
Zarcone's  affirmative  defenses  because  the  Murphy  Co.  owned  the  "Murphy"  trademark,  and 
fraud in the inducement of the agreement had not been demonstrated.  

Accordingly, the district court ordered a preliminary injunction enjoining all defendants 
from violating Murphy's rights under the common law of trademark and of unfair competition. It 
also  assessed  against  only  ISS  damages  of  $6,330  for  failure  to  pay  for  the  forty-eight  beds 
delivered to Zarcone by Murphy in May 1986.  

 

3 

A separate trial was held to determine the remaining damages. At a deposition prior to 
both trials, the parties had stipulated to limit recovery of damages "to the profits made by the 
defendants through the sale of products bearing the Murphy name." At the second trial, Zarcone 
failed  to  produce  any  records  regarding  its  gross  sales  of  Murphy  beds.  However,  Murphy's 
expert testified, in the words of the district court, that "gross sales of wall beds and cabinets sold 
by  [ISS]  from  June  1,  1986  to  May  30,  1988  under  the  Murphy  name  when  in  fact  not 
manufactured  by  Murphy  was  $1,780,357."  Using  this  figure,  and  deducting  from  it  the 
estimated costs of the goods sold, the court, by an order and a judgment, both dated September 
14, 1988, assessed against both Zarcone personally and ISS compensatory damages of $801,161, 
with interest from May 30, 1988, for trademark infringement and unfair competition. Punitive 
damages  of  $25,000  for  trademark  infringement  and  unfair  competition  also  were  assessed 
against  Zarcone  personally  and  ISS,  without  specifying  what  portion  of  the  overall  punitive 
damages award was allocated to each claim. A permanent injunction enjoining all defendants, 
including MBCA Ga. and MBCA Fl., from infringing upon the Murphy trademark replaced the 
temporary  injunction  of  the  first  order.  The  court  reiterated  its  earlier  assessment  of  $6330  in 
damages for breach of contract, this time including Zarcone in the liability and adding interest 
from May 21, 1986, the date Zarcone was billed by Murphy for the forty-eight beds. Thus, the 
decision and order dated September 14, 1988 awards the Murphy Co. "the sum of $801,161 as 
compensatory damages and the sum of $25,000 as punitive damages, a total of $826,161[,] and 
the sum of $6,330 with interest from May 21, 1986." 

 

1. Trademark Infringement 

DISCUSSION 

The district court found that Murphy had shown that the term Murphy bed had secondary 
meaning — i.e. that the term symbolized a particular business, product or company — and thus 
was protectable. As a result, the court assigned to defendants the burden of proving that the term 
somehow  had  been  transformed  into  a  generic  phrase.  The  defendants  did  not  sustain  their 
burden,  in  the  view  of  the  court.  Defendants  now  claim  that  the  court  improperly  placed  the 
burden of proof upon them, arguing that, instead, Murphy should have been required to prove 
that the trademark was not generic. 

A  term  or  phrase  is  generic  when  it  is  commonly  used  to  depict  a  genus  or  type  of 
product, rather than a particular product. See Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc., 
537 F.2d 4, 9 (2d Cir.1976). When a term is generic, "trademark protection will be denied save 
for those markets where the term still has not become generic and a secondary meaning has been 
shown to continue." Id. at 10. We have held that "the burden is on plaintiff to prove that its mark 
is a valid trademark ... [and] that its unregistered mark is not generic." Reese Publishing Co. v. 
Hampton Int'l Communications, Inc., 620 F.2d 7, 11 (2d Cir.1980). 

As  the  Murphy  mark  is  unregistered,  Reese  suggests  that  the  district  court  erred  in 
shifting  the  burden  of  proof  to  the  defendants.  However,  the  words  at  issue  in  Reese,  "Video 
Buyer's Guide," were of common use before the product developer applied them to his product, 
whereas here, the term Murphy bed was created for its purpose by the manufacturer and only 
thereafter was it adopted by the public as a matter of common use. See Gimix v. JS & A Group, 
Inc., 699 F.2d 901, 905 (7th Cir.1983) (differentiating between term in common usage before 
application to product and coinage of term to suit product that is later expropriated). It was this 

 

4 

genericness  of  an  "invented"  term  that  Learned  Hand  addressed  when  determining  whether 
"aspirin," a coined word, had been so adopted by the lay public as to become generic. See Bayer 
Co. v. United Drug Co., 272 F. 505, 509 (S.D.N.Y.1921); see also King-Seeley Thermos Co. v. 
Aladdin Indus., Inc., 321 F.2d 577, 579 (2d Cir.1963) (wide-spread use of the word "thermos," 
despite having been invented by plaintiff for description of vacuum bottle, created genericness); 
DuPont  Cellophane  Co.  v.  Waxed  Products  Co.,  85  F.2d  75,  81  (2d  Cir.)  (expropriation  by 
public  of  word  "cellophane"  created  genericness),  cert. denied,  299  U.S.  601  (1936).  We  find 
this  distinction  important  and  hold  that  where  the  public  is  said  to  have  expropriated  a  term 
established by a product developer, the burden is on the defendant to prove genericness. Thus, 
critical  to  a  trial  court's  allocation  of  proof  burdens  is  a  determination  of  whether  the  term  at 
issue is claimed to be generic by reason of common usage or by reason of expropriation. This 
presumption of non-genericness of a product name in the case of apparent public expropriation is 
justified by the commercial protection a developer of innovations deserves. 

The Murphy Co. was the first to employ the word Murphy to describe a bed that could be 
folded into a wall closet. It is claimed that over time the public adopted, or, rather, expropriated, 
the term Murphy bed as a synonym for any bed that folds into a closet. Accordingly, the district 
court was correct in placing the burden of proof of genericness upon the defendants. We find, 
however, that Zarcone did indeed establish the genericness of the term Murphy bed. 

The  following  factors  combined  lead  us  to  conclude  that  Zarcone  showed  at  trial  that 
today the term Murphy bed, in the eyes of "a substantial majority of the public," King-Seeley, 
321 F.2d at 579, refers to a species of bed that can fold into a wall enclosure. First, the decision 
of the PTO, and certainly the TTAB, is to be accorded great weight. See Syntex Laboratories, Inc. 
v.  Norwich  Pharmacal  Co.,  437  F.2d  566,  569  (2d  Cir.1971).  The  district  court  explicitly 
rejected the decisions of the PTO and TTAB finding genericness, despite acknowledging their 
persuasive force. Second, the term Murphy bed is included in many dictionaries as a standard 
description of a wall-bed. See, e.g., Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1489 (1981). 
While  dictionary  definitions  are  not  conclusive  proof  of  a  mark's  generic  nature,  they  are 
influential  because  they  reflect  the  general  public's  perception  of  a  mark's  meaning  and 
implication.  See  Gimix,  699  F.2d  at  905.  Third,  Zarcone  introduced  as  evidence  numerous 
examples of newspaper and magazine use of the phrase Murphy bed to describe generally a type 
of bed. Again, such evidence is not proof positive, but it is a strong indication of the general 
public's perception that Murphy bed connotes something other than a bed manufactured by the 
Murphy  Co.  See  Dan  Robbins  &  Assocs.,  Inc.  v.  Questor  Corp.,  599  F.2d  1009,  1014 
(C.C.P.A.1979). 

In finding a lack of genericness, the district court was influenced by Murphy's efforts at 
policing its mark. The court noted with approval instances where Murphy complained to those 
who  had  used  the  term  Murphy  bed  to  describe  beds  not  necessarily  produced  by  Murphy. 
However, when, as here, the mark has "entered the public domain beyond recall," policing is of 
no consequence to a resolution of whether a mark is generic. King-Seeley, 321 F.2d at 579.1 

                                                 
1 Indeed, the only evidence that even arguably supports the view that the mark was not generic is the circumstance 
that other manufacturers did not use the term Murphy bed to describe their beds. However, that fact is not sufficient 
to support a conclusion that the mark is not generic, especially since Murphy's action in policing the mark might 
well have deterred other manufacturers from using the term Murphy bed in describing their products. 

 

5 

Because we find that the evidence presented at trial demonstrated the genericness of the 
term Murphy bed, the claim for trademark infringement must fail. Neither statutory law, namely 
the Lanham Act, nor common law supports a claim for trademark infringement when the mark in 
question is generic. See CES Publishing Corp. v. St. Regis Publications, Inc., 531 F.2d 11, 13 (2d 
Cir.1975). Murphy argues that state law entitles the owner of a generic term that has secondary 
meaning  to    enforceable  rights.  The  cases  upon  which  Murphy  relies,  however,  address  the 
situation where a generic term already in public use later acquires secondary meaning by virtue 
of  a  product  developer's  unique  use,  thus  warranting  trademark  protection.  See,  e.g.,  Anti-
Defamation League of B'Nai B'rith v. Arab Anti-Defamation League, 72 Misc.2d 847, 855, 340 
N.Y.S.2d  532,  534-44  (1972).  They  have  no  applicability  where,  as  here,  the  trademark  was 
initially an invented term and lost its protection because of later public expropriation. 
2. Unfair Competition 

A  claim  of  trademark  infringement  is  but  a  part  of  the  broader  claim  of  unfair 
competition. Standard Paint Co. v. Trinidad Asphalt Mfg. Co., 220 U.S. 446, 457 (1911). Thus, 
while the mark Murphy bed may be generic and not entitled to trademark protection, Murphy's 
claim of unfair competition is not foreclosed. 

"[U]nfair competition ... encompass[es] a broader range of unfair practices which may be 
generally  described  as  a  misappropriation  of  the  skill,  expenditures,  and  labor  of  another." 
American  Footwear  Corp.  v.  General  Footwear  Co.,  609  F.2d  655,  662  (2d  Cir.1979),  cert. 
denied,  445  U.S.  951  (1980).  Such  practices  include  "confusing  the  public  into  mistakenly 
purchasing  the  product  in  the  belief  that  the  product  is  the  product  of  the  competitor."  Id. 
Because the term Murphy bed is generic, Zarcone did not engage in unfair competition by selling 
and advertising his products as Murphy beds; Zarcone did engage in unfair competition, however, 
by passing off products of his own manufacture as Murphy Co. products. He filled the Magnolia 
order with beds that he manufactured but described in the invoice as Murphy beds with Murphy 
Co.  style  numbers.  Moreover,  Zarcone  advertised  in  newspapers  the  wall  beds  that  he 
manufactured as "Murphy Bed Co. of America, Inc. — Original Wall-Bed Systems" and "The 
New Murphy Beds ... Original Wall Bed Systems." Even though "original" might refer to the 
genus of design rather than to a bed manufactured by the Murphy Co., there is no doubt that the 
public  generally  would  associate  the  term  "original"  with  the  first  company  to  manufacture 
Murphy beds, the Murphy Co. As the district court found, Zarcone "intentionally represented his 
product as plaintiff's wall bed." 687 F.Supp. at 763. That is unfair competition. See King-Seeley, 
321  F.2d  at  581  ("thermos"  held  to  be  generic  but  defendants  prohibited  from  using  term 
"genuine" or "original"); Paul Westphal v. Westphal's World's Best Corp., 216 A.D. 53, 63, 215 
N.Y.S. 4, 13 (1st Dep't) (defendant cannot advertise its hair tonic as the original and genuine 
formula), aff'd, 243 N.Y. 639, 154 N.E. 638 (1926). 
3. Breach of Contract 

The district court permanently enjoined defendants from further use of the Murphy name. 
Although  the  injunction  was  issued  to  prevent  trademark  infringement,  it  was  proper  because 
defendants had contracted to refrain from use of the Murphy name in the event of a termination 
of  the  distribution  agreement  and  did  not  so  refrain.  The  contract  was  supported  by  valid 
consideration; defendants had an exclusive and valuable distributorship in four key counties in 
Florida  to  sell  well-recognized  products  manufactured  by  Murphy.  The  contract  was  properly 
terminated by September 30, 1986, when Zarcone received the certified letter from the Murphy 

 

6 

Co.  demanding  that  he  cease  use  of  the  Murphy  name.  Moreover,  the  propriety  of  the  clause 
prohibiting  Zarcone's  use  of  the  Murphy  mark  upon  termination  of  his  distributorship  is  not 
affected by the fact that the term Murphy bed is generic. "Most things which people contract not 
to do ... are lawful things which but for the contract they might do freely." Overhead Door Corp. 
v. Nathanson, 291 F.Supp. 961, 963 (W.D.N.C.1968). 

Defendants now argue that the contract was void ab initio because its purpose, allegedly 
the  conveyance  of  trademark  rights,  was  frustrated  because  the  mark  was  generic.  However, 
there is no indication that a transfer of trademark rights was the essence of the distributorship 
agreement.  The  contract  simply  was  a  distribution  arrangement  by  which  Zarcone  obtained 
exclusive  rights  to  sell  Murphy  Co.  products.  Furthermore,  for  five  years  defendants  used  the 
mark without interference and the rights they enjoyed paralleled the trademark rights they claim 
they should have received. Defendants therefore cannot credibly argue frustration of purpose. 

Nor  can  defendants  successfully  claim  fraud  in  the  inducement  of  the  distributorship 
contract. Without a showing of knowledge of false representation and intent to deceive Zarcone, 
fraud by Murphy cannot be established. See Mallis v. Bankers Trust Co., 615 F.2d 68, 80 (2d 
Cir.1980)  (New  York  law),  cert.  denied,  449  U.S.  1123  (1981).  Such  scienter  was  not 
demonstrated at trial. 

As to the delivery of the forty-eight beds to ISS from Murphy for which ISS did not pay, 
the district court assessed damages of $6,330 with interest against Zarcone personally and ISS. 
ISS does not contest this award. 
4. Damages 

Compensatory and punitive damages were awarded for both trademark infringement and 
unfair competition without a specific allocation of damages to each cause of action. Because we 
find that the Murphy bed mark is generic, only the district court's finding of unfair competition 
can  support  the  compensatory  damages  award.  This  alone,  however,  does  not  require  an 
adjustment of the award amount because the parties stipulated as to the measure of compensatory 
damages, regardless of the number of underlying claims. During a deposition plaintiff's attorney 
stated, with prompting and acceptance from defendants: "For the purpose of the record, we are 
willing to state we will limit our scope of proof of damages ... [and] recovery, to the profits made 
by the defendants through the sale of products bearing the Murphy name." Thus, even with only 
proof of unfair competition entitling Murphy to collect a damages award, the amount of damages 
has been set by the parties. 

The district court erred, however, in fixing the compensatory damages figure at $801,161. 
The court explicitly noted that its calculations were based on gross, not net, profits. The district 
court's order reads: "The profits made by Interior Sleep Systems is its gross sales less the cost of 
goods. We find that the cost of goods is 55% of the sales price." The court then found that the 
gross sales of the wall beds and cabinets not manufactured or distributed by Murphy that ISS 
sold  as  Murphy  products  amounted  to  $1,780,357,  based  on  testimony  by  Murphy's  expert. 
Reduction of that figure by 55% for cost of goods sold yields $801,161, the amount the court 
awarded as compensation to the Murphy Co. 

The parties' stipulation makes no mention of whether net or gross profits was to be used 
in the calculation of compensatory damages. Absent indication in the stipulation that the parties 
understood  profits  to  be  gross  profits,  we  hold  that  the  district  court  should  have  based  its 

 

7 

assessment of damages on net profits. See W.E. Bassett Co. v. Revlon, Inc., 435 F.2d 656, 665 
(2d Cir.1970) (in determining defendants' profits for purposes of trademark liability, defendant 
entitled  to  deduct  overhead,  operating  expenses  and  income  tax  from  net  sales);  Taylor  v. 
Meirick, 712 F.2d 1112, 1121 (7th Cir.1983) (in computing plaintiff's lost profits for copyright 
infringement  award,  costs  necessary  to  generate  the  income  should  be  deducted  from  sales 
revenue); see also Polo Fashions, Inc. v. Craftex, Inc., 816 F.2d 145, 149 (4th Cir.1987). Even if 
Zarcone does not offer evidence of his costs (as he has not heretofore), the court should estimate 
them based on the evidence before it. 

The award of punitive damages does not violate the parties' stipulation. As the district 
court  found  when  assessing  damages,  the  parties'  stipulation  applies  only  to  compensatory 
damages. Because the court found that Zarcone acted knowingly and with reckless disregard of 
Murphy's rights, it was free to award punitive damages beyond what it awarded as compensatory 
damages. However, the punitive damages award, premised on violations of Murphy's trademark 
and unfair competition rights, was not apportioned between the two violations. Because, as we 
now  hold,  Zarcone  is  not  guilty  of  trademark  infringement,  we  are  unable  to  determine  what 
fraction  of  the  punitive  damages  award,  if  any,  is  attributable  to  unfair  competition. 
Consequently, we remand to the district court to reformulate the award of punitive damages. 

 

CONCLUSION 

We conclude that the defendants adequately demonstrated that the Murphy bed mark is 
generic,  but  that  they  nonetheless  committed  breaches  of  their  contract  with  Murphy  and 
engaged  in  unfair  competition.  We  therefore  affirm  the  district  court's  entry  of  a  permanent 
injunction  enjoining  all  defendants  from  further  use  of  the  Murphy  name.  We  affirm  also  the 
$6,330 damages award for breach of contract. 

We  reverse  the  portion  of  the  court's  judgment  awarding  $801,161  in  compensatory 
damages  and  remand  the  case  to  the  district  court  for  recalculation  of  compensatory  damages 
based on defendants' net profits. We reverse also the court's award of punitive damages because 
we cannot discern how much of it, if any, is attributable to the trademark infringement cause of 
action,  which,  we  now  hold,  fails.  Accordingly,  we  remand  for  a  determination  of  punitive 
damages based only on the finding of unfair competition. 

Finally,  the  court  should  consider  on  remand  whether  to  subject  corporate  defendants 

MBCA Ga. and MBCA Fl. to the damages award of the judgment. 

 

8 

