 

NICHOLS v. UNIVERSAL PICTURES CORPORATION et al. 

45 F.2d 119 (2d Cir. 1930) 

 
Before L. HAND, SWAN, and AUGUSTUS N. HAND, Circuit Judges. 
 
L. HAND, Circuit Judge.  

The plaintiff is the author of a play, "Abie's Irish Rose," which it may be assumed was properly 
copyrighted under section five, subdivision (d), of the Copyright Act, 17 USCA ยง5(d).  The defen-
dant produced publicly a motion picture play, "The Cohens and The Kellys," which the plaintiff al-
leges  was  taken  from  it.    As  we  think  the  defendant's  play  too  unlike  the  plaintiff's  to  be  an  in-
fringement, we may assume, arguendo, that in some details the defendant used the plaintiff's play, 
as will subsequently appear, though we do not so decide.  It therefore becomes necessary to give an 
outline of the two plays. 

"Abie's Irish Rose" presents a Jewish family living in prosperous circumstances in New York.  
The father, a widower, is in business as a merchant, in which his son and only child helps him.  The 
boy has philandered with young women, who to his father's great disgust have always been Gen-
tiles, for he is obsessed with a passion that his daughter-in-law shall be an orthodox Jewess.  When 
the play opens the son, who has been courting a young Irish Catholic girl, has already married her 
secretly before a Protestant minister, and is concerned to soften the blow for his father, by securing 
a favorable impression of his bride, while concealing her faith and race.  To accomplish this he in-
troduces her to his father at his home as a Jewess, and lets it appear that he is interested in her, 
though he conceals the marriage. The girl somewhat reluctantly falls in with the plan; the father 
takes the bait, becomes infatuated with the girl, concludes that they must marry, and assumes that of 
course they will, if he so decides.  He calls in a rabbi, and prepares for the wedding according to the 
Jewish rite. 

Meanwhile the girl's father, also a widower, who lives in California, and is as intense in his own 
religious antagonism as the Jew, has been called to New York, supposing that his daughter is to 
marry an Irishman and a Catholic.  Accompanied by a priest, he arrives at the house at the moment 
when the marriage is being celebrated, but too late to prevent it, and the two fathers, each infuriated 
by the proposed union of his child to a heretic, fall into unseemly and grotesque antics.  The priest 
and the rabbi become friendly, exchange trite sentiments about religion, and agree that the match is 
good.  Apparently out of abundant caution, the priest celebrates the marriage for a third time, while 
the girl's father is inveigled away.  The second act closes with each father, still outraged, seeking to 
find some way by which the union, thus trebly insured, may be dissolved. 

The last act takes place about a year later, the young couple having meanwhile been abjured by 
each father, and left to their own resources.  They have had twins, a boy and a girl, but their fathers 
know no more than that a child has been born.  At Christmas each, led by his craving to see his 
grandchild, goes separately to the young folks' home, where they encounter each other, each laden 
with gifts, one for a boy, the other for a girl. After some slapstick comedy, depending upon the in-
sistence of each that he is right about the sex of the grandchild, they become reconciled when they 
learn the truth, and that each child is to bear the given name of a grandparent.  The curtain falls as 
the fathers are exchanging amenities, and the Jew giving evidence of an abatement in the strictness 
of his orthodoxy. 

 

1 

 

"The Cohens and The Kellys" presents two families, Jewish and Irish, living side by side in the 
poorer quarters of New York in a state of perpetual enmity.  The wives in both cases are still living, 
and share in the mutual animosity, as do two small sons, and even the respective dogs.  The Jews 
have a daughter, the Irish a son; the Jewish father is in the clothing business; the Irishman is a po-
liceman.    The  children  are  in  love  with  each  other,  and  secretly  marry,  apparently  after  the  play 
opens.  The Jew, being in great financial straits, learns from a lawyer that he has fallen heir to a 
large fortune from a great-aunt, and moves into a great house, fitted luxuriously.  Here he and his 
family live in vulgar ostentation, and here the Irish boy seeks out his Jewish bride, and is chased 
away by the angry father.  The Jew then abuses the Irishman over the telephone, and both become 
hysterically excited.  The extremity of his feelings makes the Jew sick, so that he must go to Florida 
for a rest, just before which the daughter discloses her marriage to her mother. 

On his return the Jew finds that his daughter has borne a child; at first he suspects the lawyer, 
but eventually learns the truth and is overcome with anger at such a low alliance.  Meanwhile, the 
Irish family who have been forbidden to see the grandchild, go to the Jew's house, and after a vio-
lent scene between the two fathers in which the Jew disowns his daughter, who decides to go back 
with her husband, the Irishman takes her back with her baby to his own poor lodgings.   [*121]  The 
lawyer, who had hoped to marry the Jew's daughter, seeing his plan foiled, tells the Jew that his for-
tune really belongs to the Irishman, who was also related to the dead woman, but offers to conceal 
his knowledge, if the Jew will share the loot.  This the Jew repudiates, and, leaving the astonished 
lawyer, walks through the rain to his enemy's house to surrender the property.  He arrives in great 
dejection, tells the truth, and abjectly turns to leave.  A reconciliation ensues, the Irishman agreeing 
to share with him equally.  The Jew shows some interest in his grandchild, though this is at most a 
minor motive in the reconciliation, and the curtain falls while the two are in their cups, the Jew in-
sisting that in the firm name for the business, which they are to carry on jointly, his name shall stand 
first.  

 It is of course essential to any protection of literary property, whether at common-law or under 
the statute, that the right cannot be limited literally to the text, else a plagiarist would escape by 
immaterial variations.  That has never been the law, but, as soon as literal appropriation ceases to be 
the test, the whole matter is necessarily at large, so that, as was recently well said by a distinguished 
judge, the decisions cannot help much in a new case.  Fendler v. Morosco, 253 N.Y. 281, 292, 171 
N.E. 56. When plays are concerned, the plagiarist may excise a separate scene [Daly v. Webster, 56 
F. 483 (C.C.A. 2); Chappell v. Fields, 210 F. 864 (C.C.A. 2); Chatterton v. Cave, L.R. 3 App. Cas. 
483]; or he may appropriate part of the dialogue (Warne v. Seebohm, L.R. 39 Ch. D. 73). Then the 
question is whether the part so taken is "substantial," and therefore not a "fair use" of the copy-
righted work; it is the same question as arises in the case of any other copyrighted work.  Marks v. 
Feist, 290 F. 959 (C.C.A. 2); Emerson v. Davies, Fed. Cas. No. 4436, 3 Story, 768, 795-797. But 
when the plagiarist does not take out a block in situ, but an abstract of the whole, decision is more 
troublesome.  Upon any work, and especially upon a play, a great number of patterns of increasing 
generality will fit equally well, as more and more of the incident is left out.  The last may perhaps 
be no more than the most general statement of what the play is about, and at times might consist 
only of its title; but there is a point in this series of abstractions where they are no longer protected, 
since otherwise the playwright could prevent the use of his "ideas," to which, apart from their ex-
pression, his property is never extended.  Holmes v. Hurst, 174 U.S. 82, 86, 19 S. Ct. 606, 43 L. Ed. 
904; Guthrie v. Curlett, 36 F.(2d) 694 (C.C.A. 2).  Nobody has ever been able to fix that boundary, 
and nobody ever can.  In some cases the question has been treated as though it were analogous to 

 

2 

 

lifting  a  portion  out  of  the  copyrighted  work  (Rees  v.  Melville,  MacGillivray's  Copyright  Cases 
[1911-1916], 168); but the analogy is not a good one, because, though the skeleton is a part of the 
body, it pervades and supports the whole.  In such cases we are rather concerned with the line be-
tween expression and what is expressed.  As respects plays, the controversy chiefly centers upon the 
characters and sequence of incident, these being the substance. 

We did not in Dymow v. Bolton, 11 F.(2d) 690, hold that a plagiarist was never liable for steal-
ing a plot; that would have been flatly against our rulings in Dam v. Kirk La Shelle Co., 175 F. 902, 
41 L.R.A. (N.S.) 1002, 20 Ann. Cas. 1173, and Stodart v. Mutual Film Co., 249 F. 513, affirming 
my decision in (D.C.) 249 F. 507; neither of which we meant to overrule.  We found the plot of the 
second play was too different to infringe, because the most detailed pattern, common to both, elimi-
nated so much from each that its content went into the public domain; and for this reason we said, 
"this  mere  subsection  of  a  plot  was  not  susceptible  of  copyright."  But  we  do  not  doubt  that  two 
plays may correspond in plot closely enough for infringement. How far that correspondence must 
go is another matter.  Nor need we hold that the same may not be true as to the characters, quite in-
dependently  of  the  "plot"  proper,  though,  as  far  as  we  know,  such  a  case  has  never  arisen.    If 
Twelfth Night were copyrighted, it is quite possible that a second comer might so closely imitate Sir 
Toby Belch or Malvolio as to infringe, but it would not be enough that for one of his characters he 
cast a riotous knight who kept wassail to the discomfort of the household, or a vain and foppish 
steward who became amorous of his mistress.  These would be no more than Shakespeare's "ideas" 
in the play, as little capable of monopoly as Einstein's Doctrine of Relativity, or Darwin's theory of 
the Origin of Species.  It follows that the less developed the characters, the less they can be copy-
righted; that is the penalty an author must bear for marking them too indistinctly. 

In the two plays at bar we think both as to incident and character, the defendant took no more -- 
assuming that it took anything at all -- than the law allowed.  The stories are quite different.  One is 
of a religious zealot  [*122] who insists upon his child's marrying no one outside his faith; opposed 
by another who is in this respect just like him, and is his foil.  Their difference in race is merely an 
obbligato to the main theme, religion. They sink their differences through grandparental pride and 
affection. In the other, zealotry is wholly absent; religion does not even appear.  It is true that the 
parents are hostile to each other in part because they differ in race; but the marriage of their son to a 
Jew does not apparently offend the Irish family at all, and it exacerbates the existing animosity of 
the Jew, principally because he has become rich, when he learns it.  They are reconciled through the 
honesty of the Jew and the generosity of the Irishman; the grandchild has nothing whatever to do 
with it.  The only matter common to the two is a quarrel between a Jewish and an Irish father, the 
marriage of their children, the birth of grandchildren and a reconciliation. 

If the defendant took so much from the plaintiff, it may well have been because her amazing 
success seemed to prove that this was a subject of enduring popularity.  Even so, granting that the 
plaintiff's play was wholly original, and assuming that novelty is not essential to a copyright, there 
is no monopoly in such a background.  Though the plaintiff discovered the vein, she could not keep 
it to herself; so defined, the theme was too generalized an abstraction from what she wrote.  It was 
only a part of her "ideas." 

Nor does she fare better as to her characters.  It is indeed scarcely credible that she should not 
have been aware of those stock figures, the low comedy Jew and Irishman. The defendant has not 
taken from her more than their prototypes have contained for many decades.  If so, obviously so to 
generalize her copyright, would allow her to cover what was not original with her.  But we need not 

 

3 

 

hold this as matter of fact, much as we might be justified.  Even though we take it that she devised 
her figures out of her brain de novo, still the defendant was within its rights. 

There are but four characters common to both plays, the lovers and the fathers.  The lovers are 
so faintly indicated as to be no more than stage properties.  They are loving and fertile; that is really 
all that can be said of them, and anyone else is quite within his rights if he puts loving and fertile 
lovers in a play of his own, wherever he gets the cue.  The plaintiff's Jew is quite unlike the defen-
dant's.  His obsession is his religion, on which depends such racial animosity as he has.  He is affec-
tionate, warm and patriarchal.  None of these fit the defendant's Jew, who shows affection for his 
daughter  only  once,  and  who  has  none  but  the  most  superficial  interest  in  his  grandchild.  He  is 
tricky, ostentatious and vulgar, only by misfortune redeemed into honesty.  Both are grotesque, ex-
travagant and quarrelsome; both are fond of display; but these common qualities make up only a 
small part of their simple pictures, no more than any one might lift if he chose.  The Irish fathers are 
even  more  unlike;  the  plaintiff's  a  mere  symbol  for  religious  fanaticism  and  patriarchal  pride, 
scarcely a character at all.  Neither quality appears in the defendant's, for while he goes to get his 
grandchild, it is rather out of a truculent determination not to be forbidden, than from pride in his 
progeny.  For the rest he is only a grotesque hobbledehoy, used for low comedy of the most conven-
tional sort, which any one might borrow, if he chanced not to know the exemplar. 

The defendant argues that the case is controlled by my decision in Fisher v. Dillingham (D.C.) 
298 F. 145. Neither my brothers nor I wish to throw doubt upon the doctrine of that case, but it is 
not applicable here.  We assume that the plaintiff's play is altogether original, even to an extent that 
in fact it is hard to believe.  We assume further that, so far as it has been anticipated by earlier plays 
of which she knew nothing, that fact is immaterial. Still, as we have already said, her copyright did 
not cover everything that might be drawn from her play; its content went to some extent into the 
public domain. We have to decide how much, and while we are as aware as any one that the line, 
whereever it is drawn, will seem arbitrary, that is no excuse for not drawing it; it is a question such 
as courts must answer in nearly all cases.  Whatever may be the difficulties a priori, we have no 
question on which side of the line this case falls.  A comedy based upon conflicts between Irish and 
Jews, into which the marriage of their children enters, is no more susceptible of copyright than the 
outline of Romeo and Juliet. 

The plaintiff has prepared an elaborate analysis of the two plays, showing a "quadrangle" of the 
common characters, in which each is represented by the emotions which he discovers.  She presents 
the resulting parallelism as proof of infringement, but the adjectives employed are so general as to 
be quite useless.  Take for example the attribute of "love" ascribed to both Jews.  The plaintiff has 
depicted her father as deeply attached  [*123]  to his son, who is his hope and joy; not so, the defen-
dant, whose father's conduct is throughout not actuated by any affection for his daughter, and who is 
merely once overcome for the moment by her distress when he has violently dismissed her lover. 
"Anger" covers emotions aroused by quite different occasions in each case; so do "anxiety," "de-
spondency" and "disgust." It is unnecessary to go through the catalogue for emotions are too much 
colored by their causes to be a test when used so broadly.  This is not the proper approach to a solu-
tion; it must be more ingenuous, more like that of a spectator, who would rely upon the complex of 
his impressions of each character. 

We cannot approve the length of the record, which was due chiefly to the use of expert wit-
nesses.  Argument is argument whether in the box or at the bar, and its proper place is the last.  The 
testimony of an expert upon such issues, especially his cross-examination, greatly extends the trial 

 

4 

 

and contributes nothing which cannot be better heard after the evidence is all submitted.  It ought 
not to be allowed at all; and while its admission is not a ground for reversal, it cumbers the case and 
tends to confusion, for the more the court is led into the intricacies of dramatic craftsmanship, the 
less likely it is to stand upon the firmer, if more naive, ground of its considered impressions upon its 
own perusal.  We hope that in this class of cases such evidence may in the future be entirely ex-
cluded, and the case confined to the actual issues; that is, whether the copyrighted work was origi-
nal, and whether the defendant copied it, so far as the supposed infringement is identical. 

The defendant, "the prevailing party," was entitled to a reasonable attorney's fee (section 40 of 

the Copyright Act [17 USCA ยง40]). 

Decree affirmed.   

 

5 

