New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

BUSINESS NEWS   LABELS & PUBLISHERS   LEGAL   TOP STORIES

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a
performing right on golden oldie recordings after
all

By Chris Cooke | Published on Wednesday 21 December 2016

If you thought that the radio royalty element of the good old pre-1972 copyright debate in
the US was all over, think again. An appeals court in New York has decided that satellite
broadcaster Sirius XM doesn’t have to pay royalties to artists and labels when it plays
1960s recordings.

Members of the Copyright Technicality Fan Club will recall that this all stems from the fact
US-wide federal copyright law only protects sound recordings released since 1972, with
older tracks getting their protection from state-level copyright law.

Meanwhile US copyright law is unusual in that there is no general ‘performing right’ as
part of the sound recording copyright. So whereas elsewhere in the world AM/FM radio
stations that play music need licences from both labels and music publishers (covering,
respectively, recording and song copyrights), in the US broadcasters only need the latter.

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 1 of 9

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Except online and satellite broadcasters, because federal copyright law does provide a
‘digital performing right’ to sound recording owners.

But what about those often quite dated state copyright laws? They are often ambiguous
about performing rights and sound recordings, but certainly don’t include any speciﬁc
rules about online and satellite stations. Meanwhile, AM/FM stations have never paid
royalties to labels for the records they play, however old the tracks may be. To that end
both Sirius and Pandora decided that, while they must pay royalties to labels and artists
for post-1972 catalogue, when they play older tracks no royalties are due.

But some in the artist and label community reckoned that royalties should be paid on
those older tracks. Flo & Eddie – former members of ‘Happy Together’ band The Turtles –
went legal on the matter, launching litigation in three states and arguing that there was, in
fact, a performing right for sound recordings in state level copyright law.

Though given state laws make no distinction between AM/FM and satellite/online radio
services, that would mean traditional radio stations should have been paying royalties to
labels whenever they played golden oldies all these years, which they had not.

Nevertheless, when the matter reached the Californian courts, Flo & Eddie won, setting a
landmark precedent that led to multi-million dollar settlements between the record
industry and Sirius and Pandora, and just last month between Sirius and Flo & Eddie.

The duo initially enjoyed success on the issue in the New York courts too, where one judge
speciﬁcally pondered whether the fact the labels had never demanded royalties from
traditional radio stations for playing 1960s tracks implied there was, in fact, no sound
recording performing right under the state’s copyright system. But that judge decided that
the failure by the labels to claim royalties shouldn’t make any difference.

However, Sirius appealed the New York case, and an appeals court there yesterday
reached a different conclusion on that last point. It would be “illogical”, said one appeals
judge, to decide that a performing right had been lingering there in New York copyright
law all these decades yet no rights owner or court had ever sought to enforce it. Illogical I
tell you! And judge Leslie Stein even sneaked a little joke into her ruling, so she must be
right.

“It would be illogical to conclude that the right of public performance would have existed

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 2 of 9

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

for decades without the courts recognising such a right as a matter of state common law,
and in the absence of any artist or record company attempting to enforce that right in this
state until now”, wrote Stein.

She added that she agreed with legal reps for Sirius that there was a “broad
understanding” in both federal and state law that the sound recording copyright does not
include a general performing right.

And that’s because artists and labels get lots of lovely promotion when their music is
played on the radio, so shouldn’t be paid for it too – that being the US radio industry’s
longtime argument as to why they shouldn’t give cash to the labels. And just because
slumping record sales possibly lower the value of all that free promo, that’s no reason for
judges to infer a new right for the labels, the judge went on.

“Common sense supports the explanation”, she wrote, “that the record companies and
artists had a symbiotic relationship with radio stations, and wanted them to play their
records to encourage name recognition and corresponding album sales”. And, she
continued – oh, and by the way, the joke’s coming up, “those participants have co-existed
for many years and, until now, were apparently ‘happy together’”. Ha, ha! Happy together!
See. That’s Flo & Eddie’s most famous hit. Good times. Yeah, OK, I oversold it slightly by
saying there was a joke in here. Sorry.

“While changing technology may have rendered it more challenging for the record
companies and performing artists to proﬁt from the sale of recordings”, she continued,
“these changes, alone, do not now warrant the precipitous creation of a common law right
that has not previously existed. Simply stated, New York’s common law copyright has
never recognised a right of public performance for pre-1972 sound recordings. Because
the consequences of doing so could be extensive and far-reaching, and there are many
competing interests at stake, which we are not equipped to address, we decline to create
such a right for the ﬁrst time now”.

One of the far-reaching consequences with inferring a general performing right for pre-
1972 sound recordings is that AM/FM stations could be sued back into the dim and distant
past for playing 1960s tracks without licence. Indeed music ﬁrm ABS Entertainment
launched such a case against CBS last year, the media ﬁrm having to employ a technicality
that even the CTFC’s most ardent members felt was a little bit cheeky: that CBS stations
played remastered versions of golden oldies, and the remastering reset the copyright at a

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 3 of 9

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

point sometime after 1972.

A total of six judges considered the appeal in the New York Flo & Eddie dispute, with four
siding with Sirius. Though one of the other judges who concluded there wasn’t a general
performing right for pre-1972 sound recordings was keen to state that that didn’t mean
on-demand streaming services could side-step paying royalties to the labels on golden
oldies as well.

Technically a stream requires making a copy anyway – so even without a state-level
general performing right or a federal-level digital performing right, Spotify and Apple
Music would still require a licence from the labels. Though you could say that, technically
speaking, personalised radio services are also making copies in the delivery of a stream,
yet in the US it has generally been agreed that Pandora et al are only exploiting the
(digital) performing rights of the copyright.

But anyway, the big question now is what does this mean for Sirius, Pandora, the record
labels, and any heritage artists who joined Flo & Eddie’s class action?

The settlement between Sirius and Flo & Eddie acknowledged that the duo’s court cases in
New York and Florida were still subject to appeal, and the size of the damages settlement
agreed was dependent on the outcome of those cases. It’s not clear if this new ruling has
any impact on the separate settlements between Sirius, Pandora and the major record
companies.

Meanwhile, moving forward, if California says there is a performing right for recordings in
its copyright laws but New York says there is not in theirs, it could mean that label
royalties have to be paid in some states but not others. It’s not clear what the technical
and constitutional implications of that would be.

Of course, another argument the music industry could use here is that it’s a bit mad for
key elements of federal copyright law – like the digital performing right – to not apply to
recordings protected under state laws, and that federal copyright rules of this kind should
be applied across the board.

The music companies weren’t originally so keen on that argument though, because they
were concurrently trying to argue that the safe harbours – which they hate so much and
which also come from federal law – shouldn’t apply on pre-1972 recordings. The record

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 4 of 9

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

industry lost that argument, though is currently trying to get the US Supreme Court to
review that judgment, so probably doesn’t want to start shouting about the key principles
of federal copyright law being applied to older sound recordings just yet.

Meanwhile, with the likes of Pandora entering into wider deals with the record companies
in order to launch fully on-demand streaming services, it could be that issues like this can
be settled within those agreements. But that doesn’t necessarily help the likes of Sirius. So,
maybe there is more lobbying and litigation to come before we can all be genuinely happy
together. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! Merry Christmas everybody!

 

 

 

 

 

 

GET MORE CMU

SIGN UP TO CMU FOR FREE | GO PREMIUM | LISTEN TO THE CMU PODCAST | GET TRAINED

OR READ MORE ABOUT: Flo & Eddie | Sirius XM

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 5 of 9

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 6 of 9

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 7 of 9

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

OUR MEDIA
Complete Music Update
ThisWeek London
ThreeWeeks Edinburgh

3CM UNLIMITED GROUP
UnLimited Media
UnLimited Insights
UnLimited Learning
UnLimited Live

OTHER SITES

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 8 of 9

New York appeals court decides there isn’t a performing right on golden oldie recordings after all | Complete Music Update

5/7/17, 1:26 PM

Media Insights
Chris Cooke's Free Speech
mynameisChrisCooke.com

All content © 3CM UnLimited 

3CM Enterprises Ltd, Kemp House, 
152 City Road, London EC1V 2NX
020 7099 9050

UnLimited Media makes use of cookies, because it makes the site better | CLICK TO ACCEPT | CLICK FOR

MORE INFO

http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/new-york-appeals-court-dec…-there-isnt-a-performing-right-on-golden-oldie-recordings-after-all/

Page 9 of 9

