218.TANG.257.DOC 

 

10/11/2012 3:34:33 PM 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
xiyin tang 
 
The Artist as Brand: Toward a Trademark Conception 
of Moral Rights 

abstract.  The Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990 (VARA) controversially recognized artists’ 
“moral rights” by protecting their work from alteration or destruction and by preventing the use 
of an artist’s name on a work he did not create. While moral rights are frequently criticized as 
antithetical to the traditional economic framework of American intellectual property law, Henry 
Hansmann and Marina Santilli have suggested that moral rights can be justified economically 
because they vindicate artists’ pecuniary interests. This Note, in contrast, argues that VARA also 
benefits  the  purchasing  and  viewing  public,  especially  in  an  era  of  factory-made  or  assistant-
produced  art  works.  Specifically,  moral  rights,  like  trademark  law,  can  reduce  search  costs, 
ensure truthful source identification, and increase efficiency in the art market. This comparison 
between  trademark  law  and  moral  rights  shows  that  the  sort  of  rights  regime  established  by 
VARA is neither unique nor unprecedented in American law, and that it is highly economic in 
character. Thus, this Note hopes to reframe the dialogue surrounding moral rights, shifting it 
away from the classic “personhood” or “anti-commodification” arguments that have undergirded 
the rhetoric up to this day. 
 
author.  Yale Law School, J.D. 2012; Columbia University, B.A. 2009. Thank you to Jack 
Balkin, Ian Ayres, James Whitman, Margot Kaminski, Paul Laskow, and the editors of The Yale 
Law  Journal  (especially  Isia  Jasiewicz)  for  their  very  helpful  comments  during  the  editing 
process.  This  Note  benefited  greatly  from  feedback  received  at  the  Yale  Law  Journal  Student 
Scholarship Workshop and the Information Society Project Ideas Lunch. 

218 
 

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2168986

 
the artist as brand 

 
 
 
 
 

note contents 

introduction 
i. a brief moral rights primer 

A. The Berne Convention and the Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990 
B. Scholarly Reactions to the VARA Regime 

ii. the contingent art object and the artist as brand 

A. Contemporary Art and the Cult of the Authentic 
B. The Artist as Brand: From “Reputational Externalities” to  

Consumer Confusion 
1. Identity as Branding 
2. The Contingent Art Object 

C. Authorship, Brand Building, and the Creation of Goodwill 

iii. comparing moral rights and trademark law 

A. Trademark Law and the Attenuation of the “First Sale Doctrine” 
B. Source Identification and Source Confusion 
C. Famous Artists, Famous Brands: A Brief Remark on Dilution 

iv. who’s afraid of moral rights? 

A. Are There Alternatives? 

1. Copyright and Its Limitations 
2. Why Not Just Use Traditional Trademark Law? 

B. Can Moral Rights Advance the Public Interest? 

conclusion 
 
 

 
 

 

 

220 
223 
223 
227 
229 
231 

234 
234 
237 
238 
241 
242 
245 
247 
249 
249 
250 
251 
254 
256 

219 

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2168986

 
the yale law journal 

introduction 

 

122:218 

  2012 

The Armory Show, the self-described “leading international contemporary 
and modern art fair and one of the most important annual art events in New 
York,” comes to town once a year.1 When it does, Manhattan’s Piers 92 and 94 
are  transformed  into  a  sort  of  art  bazaar,  replete  with  buyers,  sellers, 
tastemakers, and those generally hoping to see and be seen.2 There are fabulous 
parties, art-world celebrities, and art objects up for sale at six-digit prices.3 It is, 
in short, the art world’s version of New York Fashion Week—just one of many 
parallels between art and the luxury goods market that I hope to draw in this 
Note.4  It  is  also  another  example  of  the  type  of  money-driven  spectacle  that 
some  art  critics  have  denounced  as  commodifying  what  should  resist 
commodification.  Detractors  claim  the  emphasis  on  real  market  value 
denigrates  art,  which  should  hold  itself  aloft  from  such  petty  realities  as  the 
economy, capitalism, and commodity fetishism.5 We respond to such idealism 
with  compassion  and  sympathy.  The  idea  of  the  starving  artist  in  pursuit  of 
some  greater  truth,  after  all,  has  captivated  the  collective  imagination  even 
before the oft-circulated tale of Vincent van Gogh, his poverty, his posthumous 
fame,  and  that  bloody  ear  (a  perfect  emblem  of  artistic  madness  and 
misunderstood genius).6 

 

1.   THE ARMORY SHOW, http://www.thearmoryshow.com (last visited Sept. 3, 2012). 
2.   See  David  Rimanelli,  Furry  Friends,  ARTFORUM  DIARY 
13, 

2005), 
http://artforum.com/diary/id=8565 (describing the scene at the 2005 Armory Show preview 
gala “for which ticket-holders had paid as much as $1,000 a head” and which featured “big-
ticket early birds” including “[Museum of Modern Art] chair Ronald Lauder and his wife Jo 
Carole,  Henry  and  Marie-Josee  Kravis,  Rosa  de  la  Cruz,  Isaac  Mizrahi,  Patti  Cisneros, 
Donald Marron, and Kathy Fuld”). 

(Mar. 

3.   See, e.g., Press Release, Armory Show, The 2011 Armory Show: Fresher Content, Notable 
Sales  and  Record  Attendance  (Mar.  14,  2011),  http://www.thearmoryshow.com/press 
_releases/2011-03-14.pdf  (highlighting  notable  sales,  including  a  Kool-Aid  drawing  by 
David Hammons for $325,000 and an Antony Gormley sculpture for $125,000). 
I should note that the observation that art has become increasingly like luxury goods is not a 
novel one. For example, Amy M. Adler, in her article Against Moral Rights, 97 CALIF. L. REV. 
263,  298  (2009),  has  made  this  same  observation.  However,  as  one  may  guess  from  her 
work’s title, the parallel has led her to suggest the abolition of moral rights, rather than to 
demonstrate their importance. Id. at 298-99. 

4.  

5.   See, e.g., Helen Molesworth, In Memory of Static: Helen Molesworth on the Art of Klara Liden, 
ARTFORUM, Mar. 2011, at 214, 223 (“In [contemporary artist Klara Liden’s] work, I sense a 
tacit acknowledgment that the jig is up, that being an artist is just another way of getting by, 
a coping strategy for living under late capitalism.”). 

6.   See  Adam  Gopnik,  Van  Gogh’s  Ear:  The  Christmas  Eve  that  Changed  Modern  Art,  NEW 
YORKER, Jan. 4, 2010, http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/01/04/100104fa_fact 

220 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

So  here’s  a  modern-day  anecdote  that  might  shatter  such  idealistic 
optimism. During the 2011 Armory Show, a popular British artist, whom I will 
call  Artist  X,  came  to  town.  When  he  arrived  in  New  York,  he  ordered  his 
assistant  to  fill  a  cardboard  box  with  brown  clothes.  “What  kind  of  brown 
clothes?”  the  assistant  asked.  “Any  brown  clothes,”  was  the  response.  The 
assistant  and  his  friend  ran  around  the  city’s  thrift  shops  for  a  few  hours 
collecting  brown  clothes  of  all  sorts—tops,  sweaters,  pants,  hats.  The  total 
came  up  to  around  fifteen  dollars.  They  loaded  the  clothes  into  a  cardboard 
box. They delivered the box to Artist X. A few hours later, the “art piece” was 
sold for $40,000. 

This  story  was  relayed  to  me  by  the  same  assistant’s  friend  who  had 
collected  the  clothes,  and  yet  I  have  almost  resisted  using  it  because  of  its 
hearsay (and heretical) character. But lore or not, the anecdote is powerful, for 
it  manages  to  capture  a  number  of  head-shaking,  difficult  issues  with  the 
contemporary art world. The blasphemous idea that the artist didn’t even lay a 
hand on the finished product; the unfair markup of art that took neither skill 
nor extensive labor to make; the pure object-ness of postmodern art that might 
even put Duchamp and his urinal7 to shame; and the lack of comprehensibility 
behind it all—what greater truth was Artist X getting at with his box of brown 
clothes,  really?  After  a  while,  one  begins  to  suspect  that  perhaps  there  is  no 
greater  truth  to  contemporary  art  at  all,  and  that  the  only  truth  is  the  artist 
having a laugh at everyone else’s expense. 

These issues are important because they have in some way either pervaded 
or  been  evaded  by  the  dialogue  about  artists’  moral  rights,  which  have  long 
existed  in  Europe  but  which  the  United  States  only  brought  into  law  two 
decades  ago.  The  Visual  Artists  Rights  Act  of  1990,8  or  VARA,  was  only 
reluctantly passed to bring the United States into compliance with the Berne 
Convention;  indeed,  the  United  States  resisted  joining  that  international 
copyright convention in part because of its opposition to granting artists moral 
rights.9  Perhaps  for  this  reason,  VARA—which  protects  only  “visual  art”10—
 

7.  

_gopnik (referring to the legendary story of van Gogh severing his own ear as “a talisman 
of modern painting” and “an inspiring story of sacrifices made and sainthood attained by 
artists willing to lose their sanity, and their ears, on its behalf”). 
In 1917, the French artist Marcel Duchamp famously presented a manufactured urinal in the 
museum setting, thus giving a “readymade” object the status of “art.” See 1 HAL FOSTER ET 
AL.,  ART  SINCE  1900:  MODERNISM,  ANTIMODERNISM,  POSTMODERNISM,  1900-1944,  at  129 
(2004)  (detailing  how  Duchamp  chose  a  urinal,  rotated  it  ninety  degrees,  placed  it  on  a 
pedestal, and put it on exhibition in 1917). 

8.   Pub. L. No. 101-650, 104 Stat. 5128 (codified at 17 U.S.C. § 106A (2006)). 
9.   See H.R. REP. NO. 101-514, at 8 (1990), reprinted in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6915, 6917 (“While 
the [Berne] Convention is the premier international copyright convention, consensus over 

 

221 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

has  subsequently  been  denounced  as  “doctrinally  inconsistent  with  U.S. 
copyright and property law,” as threatening “economic investment in the arts 
and thus constrict[ing] artistic creativity,” and as “limit[ing] editorial freedom 
and giv[ing] artists broad grants of power over purely aesthetic matters.”11 The 
legal debate surrounding VARA has tended to go one of two ways. Either art is 
somehow  sacred  and  special,  and  so  we  need  moral  rights  to  express  our 
societal belief in art as a manifestation of the innermost expression of an artist’s 
soul; or art is a pure commodity object, much like a luxury good, and so we 
should rid ourselves of a special class of protection for it.12 

This Note will argue, on the other hand, that it is precisely because art today 
has become a pure commodity object that we need moral rights to protect the 
artist’s economic interests. It argues, in effect, that mere copyright protection 
for  visual  art  is  not  enough,  cloaking  “fine  art”  objects13  with  a  class  of 
protection  far  less  extensive  than  the  wide  plethora  of  legal  remedies  a 
trademark  holder  has  under  trademark  law.  Instead,  a  comparison  of  moral 
rights with trademark law will reveal that moral rights are (a) neither unique 
nor  unprecedented  in  American  intellectual  property  law  and  (b)  highly 
economic  in  character.  In  undertaking  this  analysis,  I  hope  to  update  the 
outdated justifications behind moral rights for the contemporary  era of artist 
“factories”  and  assistant-made,  rather  than  artist-made,  products.  This 
approach frees moral rights justifications from the classic personhood and anti-
commodification  arguments  that  have  undergirded  them  up  to  this  day.14  In 
 

United  States  adherence  was  slow  to  develop  in  large  part  because  of  debate  over  the 
requirements of Article 6bis [the moral rights provision].”). 

10.   17 U.S.C. § 106A. 
11.   JOHN  HENRY  MERRYMAN,  ALBERT  E.  ELSEN  &  STEPHEN  K.  URICE,  LAW,  ETHICS,  AND  THE 

VISUAL ARTS 438 (5th ed. 2007). 

12.   Compare  Carter  v.  Helmsley-Spear,  Inc.,  71  F.3d  77,  81  (2d  Cir.  1995)  (noting  that  moral 
rights “spring from a belief that an artist in the process of creation injects his spirit into the 
work”), with Adler, supra note 4, at 265-66 (questioning “the most basic premise of moral 
rights  law”:  that  law  should  treat  visual  art  as  a  uniquely  prized  category  that  merits 
exceptions). 

13.   I use “fine art” interchangeably with “visual art,” which is the only class of art protected by 
the  Visual  Artists  Rights  Act  of  1990  (VARA).  A  work  of  “visual  art”  is  defined  as  “a 
painting, drawing, print, or sculpture, existing in a single copy, in a limited edition of 200 
copies  or  fewer  that  are  signed  and  consecutively  numbered  by  the  author,”  or  “a  still 
photographic image produced for exhibition purposes only, existing in a single copy that is 
signed  by  the  author,  or  in  a  limited  edition  of  200  copies  or  fewer  that  are  signed  and 
consecutively numbered by the author.” 17 U.S.C. § 101. 

14.   See, e.g., THOMAS W. MERRILL & HENRY E. SMITH, PROPERTY: PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES 277 
(2007)  (classifying  moral  rights  as  personhood  interests);  id.  at  243  (arguing  that  such 
interests may be “inappropriate for treatment as property”). 

222 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

this  economic  analysis,  I  shift  the  conversation  from  authors’  pecuniary 
interests15  to  a  broader  focus  on  protecting  the  art  market  and  its  buyers  via 
truthful  source  indication,  drawing  out  parallels  with  trademark  law’s 
protection  of  consumers.  As  I  will  explain,  the  need  to  ensure  accurate 
identification and proper display of an artist’s work to both the buying and the 
viewing  public  has  become  even  more  dire  in  the  age  of  what  art  historian 
Martha Buskirk calls the “contingent object”—the category of highly context-
sensitive artworks that are easily fabricated based off of an artist’s plans.16 

Part  I  will  examine  the  new,  post-1960s  industrial  art  object  and  the 
accompanying  concept  of  the  artist  as  brand,  or  as  someone  who  carefully 
crafts  a  corporate  image  much  like  trademark  holders  do  with  their  brand 
names.  I  then  go  on  to  argue  in  Part  II  that  the  moral  rights  regime  under 
VARA in fact bears many striking resemblances to trademark law. Finally, the 
last  Part  will  discuss  the  inadequacy  of  a  pure  copyright  regime  for  fine  arts 
given the new state of the contingent art object. 

I  want  to  make  clear  that  this  Note  in  no  way  seeks  to  argue  that  this 
current  trend  of  art-as-commodity-object,  or  artist-as-businessman, 
is 
preferable  to  a  world  in  which  the  inspired  artist  sets  out  to  connote  some 
greater meaning or truth. In many ways I think (and others would likely agree) 
that this development is lamentable. But that is a different paper, for a different 
world that is not our own—a paper for the idealist rather than for the realist. In 
this Note, I remain only the latter. 

i. a brief moral rights primer 

A. The Berne Convention and the Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990 

The  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Literary  and  Artistic  Works,  or  the 
Berne  Convention,17  has  been  referred  to  as  the  “world’s  most  important 
copyright  convention.”18  While  the  multilateral  treaty  was  signed  in  Berne, 
Switzerland  on  September  9,  1886,  the  United  States  refused  to  ratify  it  for 
about a century, partly because the United States lacked the incentive to protect 
its  own  proprietary  interests  abroad  when  it  was  mainly  concerned  with 

 

15.   See  Henry  Hansmann  & Marina  Santilli,  Authors’  and  Artists’  Moral  Rights:  A  Comparative 

Legal and Economic Analysis, 26 J. LEGAL STUD. 95 (1997). 

16.   See MARTHA BUSKIRK, THE CONTINGENT OBJECT OF CONTEMPORARY ART (2003). 
17.   Sept. 9, 1886, 828 U.N.T.S. 221. 
18.   H.R. REP. NO. 101-735, at 6 (1990), reprinted in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6935, 6937. 

 

223 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

importing copyrighted goods, rather than exporting its own.19 However, by the 
mid-1980s,  “losses  to  U.S.  copyright  proprietors  from  piracy  abroad  had 
mounted  into  the  billions  of  dollars”  as  the  United  States  became  one  of  the 
principal  exporters  of  copyrighted  goods  in  the  world.20  With  that  shift,  the 
U.S.  attitude  toward  the  Berne  Convention—and  toward  securing  foreign 
compliance  for  American  intellectual  property  abroad—began  to  change. 
Finally,  in  1988,  after  almost  one  hundred  years  of  debate,  the  United  States 
joined the Convention.21 

Specifically,  as  Congress  acknowledged,  “[w]hile  the  Convention  is  the 
premier  international  copyright  convention,  consensus  over  United  States 
adherence was slow to develop . . . because of debate over the requirements of 
Article  6bis  [of  the  Convention].  The  principal  question  was  whether  that 
article required the United States to enact new laws protecting moral rights.”22 
A debate ensued over whether a patchwork of existing federal and state laws, 
both statutory and common, were sufficient to  comply with the  moral rights 
requirements  of  Berne.23  The  enactment  of  the  Visual  Artists  Rights  Act 
signaled  an  attempt  to  create  a  unified  federal  system  of  moral  rights  laws 
adhering  to  the  basic  requirements  of  Berne,  though  it  is  by  no  means  as 
comprehensive as many European systems.24 

The American moral rights regime as enacted under VARA applies only to 
a  work  of  “visual  art,”25  defined  as  “a  painting,  drawing,  print,  or  sculpture, 
existing in a single copy, [or] in a limited edition of 200 copies or fewer,” or “a 
still photographic image produced for  exhibition purposes only,  existing in a 

 

19.   See  David  Nimmer,  Nation,  Duration,  Violation,  Harmonization:  An  International  Copyright 
Proposal for the United States, 55 LAW & CONTEMP. PROBS. 211, 212-14 (1992). Nimmer notes, 
for example, that a “famous exclamation” of 1820 asked: “In the four quarters of the globe, 
who  reads  an  American  book?”  Id.  at  212  (quoting  United  Dictionary  Co.  v.  G.  &  C. 
Merriam  Co.,  208  U.S.  260,  264  (1908)).  Nimmer  characterizes  the  nineteenth-century 
United States as a “piracy haven” in which “U.S. publishers busied themselves bootlegging 
the works of Dickens, Trollope, and Hugo.” Id. Indeed, “[e]ven as late as World War II, the 
United States remained a net importer of copyrighted goods.” Id. at 214. 

20.   Id. at 215. 
21.   H.R. REP. NO. 101-514, at 8 (1990), reprinted in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6915, 6917. 
22.   Id. 
23.   Id. 
24.   Id. at 10 (noting that the Act “brings U.S. law into greater harmony with laws of other Berne 
countries,” in addition to serving “another important Berne objective—that of harmonizing 
national copyright laws”). France, which has the most comprehensive moral rights regime, 
grants a host of additional moral rights not just to visual artists, but also, for example, to 
literary authors. See Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 135. 

25.   17 U.S.C. § 106A (2006). 

224 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

single copy . . . or in a limited edition of 200 copies or fewer that are signed and 
consecutively  numbered  by  the  author.”26  The  Act  encompasses  three  major 
rights: the right of integrity, or the right “to prevent any intentional distortion, 
mutilation,  or  other  modification  of  the  work  which  would  be  prejudicial  to 
[the artist’s] honor or reputation”;27 the right of attribution, which allows an 
artist “to claim authorship of that work” and “to prevent the use of his or her 
name as the author of any work of visual art which he or she did not create”;28 
and  lastly,  for  works  “of  recognized  stature,”  the  right  to  prevent  “any 
intentional or grossly negligent destruction” of the work.29 These rights persist 
only for the life of the artist, and, crucially, they can be waived.30 But VARA 
creates an opt-out, rather than an opt-in, system—meaning that the burden is 
on the buyer to contract around moral rights, which are in place as the default. 
This regime is designed to protect artists who are assumed, whether rightly or 
not,  to  have  less  bargaining  power  and  to  be  less  knowledgeable  than  the 
wealthy  buyers  of  their  work.  Congress  has  stated  that  artists  are  in  “a 
relatively  weak[er]  economic  position”  and  hence  would  be  “better  protected 
under  a  regime  requiring  specificity  of  waivers.”31  In  other  words,  the  VARA 
default  is  an  information-forcing  mechanism  that  discourages  the  presumably 
better-informed buyer from withholding valuable information from the artist.32 

This Note will not focus on the right against destruction. For one, the right 
is  slightly  anomalous,  applying  only  to  “work[s]  of  recognized  stature.”33 
Further,  courts  have  interpreted  the  requirement  to  mean  not  only  that  the 
artist  himself  must  be  renowned,  but  that  the  specific  artwork  subject  to 
litigation  must  also  have  acquired  “recognized  stature”  status.34  This  object-
specific  (rather  than  artist-specific)  focus  thus  bears  more  resemblance  to 
historical  landmark  preservation  than  trademark  law.  I  would  point  out, 
however, that the right to prevent destruction could be economically justified 

 

26.   Id. § 101. 
27.   Id. § 106A(a)(3)(A). 
28.   Id. § 106A(a)(1)-(2). The right of attribution also prevents the use of the artist’s name as the 

author of the work in the event of a distortion, mutilation, or other modification. 

29.   Id. § 106A(a)(3)(b). 
30.   Id. § 106A(d), 106A(e)(1). 
31.   H.R. REP. NO. 101-514, at 17 (1990), reprinted in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6915, 6928. 
32.   See Ian Ayres & Robert Gertner, Filling Gaps in Incomplete Contracts: An Economic Theory of 

Default Rules, 99 YALE L.J. 87, 94 (1989). 

33.   17 U.S.C. § 106A(a)(3)(b). 
34.   Scott v. Dixon, 309 F. Supp. 2d 395, 400 (E.D.N.Y. 2004). 

 

225 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

on its own terms by applying the real property principle of waste.35 But because 
this  Note  focuses  on  the  signaling  effects  of  an  artist’s  name  (as  brand  or 
trademark), I will leave a full economic discussion of what happens when an 
artwork is destroyed for another day. 

I will also point out that while examining the parallels between trademark 
law and moral rights law, I have left out discussion of fair use,36 to which both 
trademark  and  moral  rights  are  subject,  and  which  constitutes  an  important 
limitation  on  a  right  holder’s  monopoly  power.37  While  there  have  been  a 
number  of  successful  fair  use  defenses  employed  in  trademark  infringement 
actions, I know of no cases in which defendants have asserted a fair use defense 
under VARA. Consequently, and because fair use is determined on a case-by-
case basis, it is difficult to tell how courts would apply the four elements of fair 
use  inquiry38  in  the  moral  rights  context.  VARA’s  legislative  history,  at  least, 
suggests that while Congress fully intended the fair use provisions to apply, it 
nonetheless felt that 

it  is  unlikely  that  such  claims  will  be  appropriate  given  the  limited 
number of works covered by the Act, and given that the modification of 

 

35.   Specifically, the doctrine of “waste” in real property law suggests that a property owner’s 
decisionmaking—especially  in  the  short  run—might  be  defective,  and  therefore  collective 
intervention is needed in order to prevent waste of culturally valuable goods in the long run. 
See Eyerman v. Mercantile Trust Co., 524 S.W.2d 210 (Mo. Ct. App. 1975); JOSEPH L. SAX, 
PLAYING DARTS WITH A REMBRANDT: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RIGHTS IN CULTURAL TREASURES 
9 (1999) (arguing that “owned objects in which a larger community has a legitimate stake 
because they embody ideas . . . of importance,” such as art, should be privately owned, but 
with  “several  qualifications”  to  the  “ordinary  notion  of  ownership”  so  that  community 
interests are preserved); Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right To Destroy, 114 YALE L.J. 781, 796 
(2005)  (“Concern  about  wasting  valuable  resources  is,  by  far,  the  most  commonly  voiced 
justification for restricting an owner’s ability to destroy her property. In cases where a living 
person  seeks  to  destroy  her  property,  the  courts  express  concern  about  the  diminution  of 
resources available to society as a whole.”). 

36.   Fair use is often cited as one of the built-in First Amendment protections in copyright law. 

See Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186, 220 (2003). 

37.   See 17 U.S.C. § 106A(a). For VARA, as for standard copyright protection, “fair use” includes 
use for criticism, commentary, news reporting, and teaching purposes, all of which would 
not constitute an infringement of an artist’s moral right. Id. § 107. In trademark law, fair use 
includes  “a  nominative  or  descriptive  fair  use  .  .  .  including  use  in  connection  with  .  .  . 
identifying  and  parodying,  criticizing,  or  commenting  upon  the  famous  mark  owner,”  as 
well  as  all  forms  of  news  reporting  and  any  noncommercial  use.  15  U.S.C.  §  1125(c)(3) 
(2006). 

38.   17 U.S.C. § 107 (defining the four elements of fair use inquiry as “(1) the purpose and character 
of the use . . . ; (2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount . . . used . . . ; and  
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for . . . the copyrighted work”). 

226 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

a  single  copy  or  limited  edition  of  a  work  of  visual  art  has  different 
implications for the fair use doctrine than does an act involving a work 
reproduced in potentially unlimited copies.39 

However,  this  is  not  to  say  that  there  have  not  been  transformative  uses 
made of an original, single-copy artwork in the past. For example, in 1953, the 
famous  artist  Robert  Rauschenberg  painted  over  a  work  given  to  him  by  his 
friend Willem de Kooning, another iconic artist. The resulting work, Erased de 
Kooning Drawing, has become a hallmark of modern art that fosters important 
questions about authority, meaning making, and authorial touch.40 

I  suggest  that  in  evaluating  a  fair  use  claim  under  VARA,  courts  should 
look  to  the  character  of  the  use—specifically  its  transformativeness—as  the 
most significant factor.41 Courts should also examine whether it was necessary 
for  the  defendant  to  use  this  specific  single  or  limited  edition  work,  and  the 
artistic  message  behind  doing  so.  It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  the 
possibilities  within  this  fair  use  exception  as  we  go  on  to  examine  the 
objections that some have had to VARA’s seemingly totalitarian prohibition on 
modifications. 

B. Scholarly Reactions to the VARA Regime 

Much of the legal scholarship surrounding VARA since its enactment has 
been  pointedly  negative.42  Many  have  denounced  the  Act  as  flouting  U.S. 
copyright  doctrine,  which  has  traditionally  recognized  only  economic,  not 
personal,  rights.43  Conversely,  the  justifications  for  moral  rights  in  VARA  are 

 

39.   H.R. REP. NO. 101-514, at 21 (1990), reprinted in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6915, 6932. 
40.   See 2 HAL FOSTER ET AL., ART SINCE 1900: MODERNISM, ANTIMODERNISM, POSTMODERNISM, 

1945 TO THE PRESENT 368 (2004). 

41.   See Pierre N. Leval, Toward a Fair Use Standard, 103 HARV. L. REV. 1105, 1111 (1990) (arguing 

that fair use cases should turn primarily on whether a use is transformative). 

42.   See, e.g., Adler, supra note 4; Stephen L. Carter, Owning What Doesn’t Exist, 13 HARV. J.L. & 
PUB.  POL’Y  99,  100-101  (1990)  (critiquing  legislation  based  on  moral  rights  principles 
generally); see also Lindsey A. Mills, Note, Moral Rights: Well-Intentioned Protection and Its 
Unintended Consequences, 90 TEX. L. REV. 443 (2011) (arguing that the right of integrity will 
actually harm artists and the public interest in art). 

43.   See, e.g., Gilliam v. Am. Broad. Cos., 538 F.2d 14, 24 (2d Cir. 1976); Justin Hughes, American 
Moral Rights and Fixing the Dastar “Gap,” 2007 UTAH L. REV. 659, 662 n.12 (quoting H.R. 
REP.  NO.  100-609,  at  17  (1988))  (“Under  the  U.S.  Constitution,  the  primary  objective  of 
copyright law is not to reward the author, but rather to secure for the public the benefits 
derived from the authors’ labors.”); Roberta Rosenthal Kwall, The Right of Publicity vs. the 
First Amendment: A Property and Liability Rule Analysis, 70 IND. L.J. 47, 59-60 (1994); Cyrill 

 

227 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

centered on the idea that art is somehow special, or sacred, and that only those 
who  do  not  understand  the  soulful  aspirations  of  an  artist  would  deign  to 
mutilate, destroy, or alter the work.44 This reasoning, in turn, has led others, 
like Stephen Carter, to point out that the moral right is “elitist and despotic,” 
for it attempts to regulate property owners from acting in “uncultured” ways.45 
Yet, as Carter argues, “you cannot legislate culture.”46 

Henry Hansmann and Marina Santilli, however, offer an outlier argument 
in  Authors’  and  Artists’  Moral  Rights:  A  Comparative  Legal  and  Economic 
Analysis.47 Their 1997 article is the first and only significant economic analysis 
of  U.S.  moral  rights  doctrine.  It  recognizes  that  the  moral  rights  framework 
creates divided property rights, or a servitude in chattels, in contravention of 
the  law’s  general  prohibition  on  such.48  This  regime,  the  authors  argue,  is 
justified because it protects important pecuniary interests. Namely, it prevents 
negative  reputational  externalities—or  the  depreciation  of  the  value  of  an 
artist’s  works  if  one  of  them  is  changed  in  a  way  that  will  damage  his 
reputation49—affecting  both  the  artist50  and  other  owners  of  his  work.51 
Hansmann  and  Santilli  explain  that  minimizing  negative  reputational 
externalities is important “[g]iven this strong connection between the value of 
a work of art and the identity of the artist who created it.”52 But their article 
does not go far enough in explaining why this is so, partly because they do not 
attempt an economic analysis of the contemporary art market. 

 

P. Rigamonti, The Conceptual Transformation of Moral Rights, 55 AM. J. COMP. L. 67, 67-68 
(2007). 

44.   See MERRYMAN ET AL., supra note 11, at 423 (“The primary justification for the protection of 
moral  rights  is  the  idea  that  the  work  of  art  is  an  extension  of  the  artist’s  personality,  an 
expression of his innermost being.”); Roberta Rosenthal Kwall, Inspiration and Innovation: 
The  Intrinsic  Dimension  of  the  Artistic  Soul,  81  NOTRE  DAME  L.  REV.  1945,  1986  (2006) 
(extolling  the  “intrinsic  creative  quality  that  requires  the  author  to  infuse  herself  into  her 
work”); see also Lior Zemer, Moral Rights: Limited Edition, 91 B.U. L. REV. 1519, 1523 (2011) 
(arguing  for  a  “stronger  version  of  moral  rights  protection”  that  will  “allow  authors  to 
realize their creative potential and contribute to social development”). 

45.   Carter, supra note 42, at 100-01. 
46.   Id. at 101. 
47.   Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15. 
48.   An author’s VARA rights run with the chattel (the artwork). See id. at 101. 
49.   Id. at 104. 
50.   Id. (“[A]lteration of works that an artist has already sold can, by damaging his reputation, 

lower the prices he can charge for other work that he sells subsequently.”). 

51.   Id.  at  105  (“Damage  to  one  of  the  artist’s  works,  in  effect,  imposes  external  costs  on  the 

artist’s other works.”). 

52.   Id. at 109. 

228 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

Part  II  of  this  Note  will  examine  why  it  is  precisely  now—in  an  era  of 
factory-made,  industrially  fabricated,  assistant-produced  artwork—that  moral 
rights are increasingly akin to trademark law. Hansmann and Santilli allude to 
the  connection  between  moral  rights  and  trademark  in  passing,  when  they 
suggest that the desire for an artist to control his work even after it has left his 
hands  “is  analogous  to  a  franchise,”  wherein  a  company  owner  wishes  to 
control  for  consistency  across  franchises.53  But  they  do  not  expand  upon  this 
connection. An examination of the contemporary art market reveals, however, 
that  the  connection  is  a  crucial  one,  and  it  provides  a  broader  economic 
justification  for  moral  rights  than  Hansmann  and  Santilli  first  elucidated.  As 
we will see below, an artist’s name, like the signaling mechanism of a franchise 
bearing the name “McDonald’s,” will serve as a ready indicator of quality and 
status to the mass public in the contemporary art market.54 

ii. the contingent art object and the artist as brand 

The capitalistic economy of the present day is an immense cosmos into which 
the individual is born . . . . It forces the individual, in so far as he is involved 
in  the  system  of  market  relationships,  to  conform  to  capitalistic  rules  of 
action.55 

As  Max  Weber  noted  almost  a  century  ago,  the  extent  to  which  any 
individual can think himself outside the economic order is questionable. Art, of 
course, is no different. By focusing solely on the contemporary art market, I do 
not mean to imply that premodern artists were innocent of this form of what I 
call  “branding.”  Authenticity  has  been,  and  will  likely  always  be,  the  sole 
differentiator between a highly priced work and a nearly worthless one—hence 

 

53.   Id. at 105. 
54.   Others have made a similar connection in the literary context, comparing an author’s name 
to a trademark. For example, Professor Laura Heymann suggests that we respect an author’s 
choice  of  pseudonym as  essentially a  branding choice,  thus  turning  the  “author  function” 
into  a  “trademark  function.”  Laura  A.  Heymann,  The  Birth  of  the  Authornym:  Authorship, 
Pseudonymity,  and  Trademark  Law,  80  NOTRE  DAME  L.  REV.  1377  (2005).  This  raises  an 
interesting question of whether courts would resolve a VARA claim for an artist who has 
changed  his  name  and  creates  under  a  pseudonym.  However,  this  issue  has  yet  to  be 
litigated. See also Jane C. Ginsburg, The Author’s Name as a Trademark: A Perverse Perspective 
on the Moral Right of “Paternity”?, 23 CARDOZO ARTS & ENT. L.J. 379, 381 (2005) (noting that 
an “author’s name functions like a trademark,” and therefore that the attribution right for 
literary works properly derives from trademark law). 

55.   MAX  WEBER,  THE  PROTESTANT  ETHIC  AND  THE  SPIRIT  OF  CAPITALISM  54  (Talcott  Parsons 

trans., Dover 2003) (1905). 

 

229 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

the insurmountably valuable judgment of art authenticators, whose very job it 
is  to  differentiate  between  the  “real”  and  the  “fake.”56  The  allure  of  the 
authentic  has  often  been  attributed  to  an  outdated,  Enlightenment-centric 
brand of thinking.57 But if the critic Walter Benjamin’s famous proclamation—
that  the  desire  for  the  original  will  soon  be  made  worthless  in  the  face  of 
mechanical reproducibility—has come true,58 it has only held true for forms of 
artistic production (photography,59 music, film) in which the proliferation  of 
identical  copies  means  that  asking  for  the  “original”  makes  no  sense.60  The 
same does not apply to fine art, the only class of art VARA protects.61 In this 
Part, I will discuss why a trademark model for thinking about moral rights is 
especially  apt  under  the  changed  conditions  of  the  contemporary  art  market, 
where, oftentimes, the artist’s signature is the art. 

 

56.   See  David  Grann,  The  Mark  of  a  Masterpiece,  NEW  YORKER,  July  12,  2010, 
http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/07/12/100712fa_fact_grann (“[An authenticator’s] 
opinions carry the weight of history; they can help a painting become part of the world’s 
cultural heritage and be exhibited in museums for centuries, or cause it to be tossed into the 
trash. His judgment can also transform a previously worthless object into something worth 
tens of millions of dollars.”). 

57.   See,  e.g.,  Douglas  Crimp,  On  the  Museum’s  Ruins,  in  THE  ANTI-AESTHETIC:  ESSAYS  ON 
POSTMODERN CULTURE 49, 61 (Hal Foster ed., 1998) (noting how modernism’s “[n]otions 
of originality, authenticity and presence . . . are undermined” by postmodernism). 

58.   See Walter Benjamin, The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technological Reproducibility: Second 
Version, in THE WORK OF ART IN THE AGE OF TECHNOLOGICAL REPRODUCIBILITY, AND OTHER 
WRITINGS ON MEDIA 19, 24 (Michael W. Jennings, Brigid Doherty & Thomas Y. Levin eds., 
2008) (“To an ever-increasing degree, the work reproduced becomes the reproduction of a 
work designed for reproducibility.”). One can see how well this prediction boded for audio 
works, film, and photography. 

59.   I  note,  however,  that  VARA  does  protect  photographs  existing  in  signed,  consecutively 
numbered,  limited-edition  copies  of  two  hundred  or  less.  See  17  U.S.C.  §  101  (2006) 
(defining “visual art”). These photographs may well be thought of as “unidentical” copies 
precisely because each copy is numbered and signed. More interestingly, this limitation on 
an  otherwise  infinitely  reproducible  print  aptly  summarizes  and  highlights  many  of  the 
issues I have addressed throughout this Note: that oftentimes, the artist’s signature (in this 
case,  on  each  numbered  print)  is  the  art,  and  that  even  an  inherently  reproducible  object 
could  obtain  scarcity  value  merely  through  external  limits  on  production.  In  this  sense, 
photography  as  defined  in  VARA  qualifies  perfectly  as  a  contingent  art  object.  See  infra 
Subsection II.B.1. 

60.   Benjamin, supra note 58, at 24-25 (“From a photographic plate for example, one can make 

any number of prints; to ask for the ‘authentic’ print makes no sense.”). 

61.   17 U.S.C. § 106A; see also id. § 101 (defining “visual art”). 

230 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

A. Contemporary Art and the Cult of the Authentic 

The  cult  of  the  “authentic”—the  yearning  to  have  this  work  be  stamped 
with the artist’s name, ensuring it an original “touched” by the artist himself —
perhaps has even more import in the modern age of celebrity culture and name-
brand obsession than at any other  moment in art (or consumer) history.  Yet 
when I say “touched,” I do not mean to imply that collectors today yearn for 
the physical labor of an artist in his work. In fact, because works of art have 
become increasingly mechanized in their production, the artist’s brand, or his 
signature, has replaced the artist’s hand (via brushstroke, for example) as the 
foremost signifier of a work’s value and meaning. Veteran art dealer Michael 
Findlay  describes  this  phenomenon  as  the  commoditization  of  contemporary 
art,  in  which  works  of  art,  no  longer  unique  entities  by  nature  of  their 
mechanical reproducibility, instead become traded like commodities in which 
the strength of the artist’s name alone determines the value of the work.62 A work 
is  not  determined  to  be  “good”  or  “bad”  via  a  critical  interpretation  of  its 
artistic  merit;  rather,  Findlay  writes,  “[s]uccessful  branding  obviates  the 
critical  approach:  the  work  of  art  must  be  good  (i.e.,  worth  its  considerable 
price) because the artist’s name is currently fashionable.”63 

When  arguing  against  the  increased  importance  of  the  artist  in  the  era  of 
modern  art,  many  like  to  evoke  the  original  father  of  the  death  of  the  artist, 
Andy  Warhol.  Amy  Adler,  for  example,  points  out  that  not  only  did  Warhol 
make “art into a consumer product” with his silkscreened sculptures imitating 
boxes  of  Brillo  pads  and  Campbell’s  tomato  juice,  but  he  was  also  prone  to 
purposefully  claiming  that  his  assistants  created  many  of  his  works.64  Adler 
uses  the  example  of  Warhol’s  mechanized  production  techniques  to  suggest 
that  the  artist’s  touch  no  longer  matters,  while  seemingly  missing  the 
distinction  between  an  artist’s  physical  touch  and  his  very  valuable  stamp  of 
approval: the “touch” of his signature.65 

 

62.   MICHAEL  FINDLAY,  THE  VALUE  OF  ART:  MONEY,  POWER,  BEAUTY  47  (2012)  (“Large, 
mechnically  produced  spin  paintings  signed  and  presumably  inspected  by  Damien  Hirst 
come, like Starbucks coffee, in three sizes . . . . [T]hey are more or less interchangeable and 
sold as branded items . . . rather than as unique works of art.”). 

63.   Id. at 152. 
64.   Adler, supra note 4, at 296. 
65.   See  id.  (“In  [Warhol’s]  Factory,  he  mass-produced  photo-silkscreens  that  never  even 
touched the romantic hand of the artist. (In modernism, the artist’s touch was the guarantor 
of his sincerity and presence, investing the canvas with his magic.) Boasting of his lack of 
connection with his own objects . . . Warhol said: ‘Why don’t you ask my assistant Gerry 
Malanga some questions? He did a lot of my paintings.’”). 

 

231 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

Indeed, Warhol’s silkscreened boxes boasting such generic store brands as 
Campbell’s  and  Brillo,  now  being  sold  for  millions  of  dollars,  highlight  the 
uncomfortable gap between the dedication to ordinary object-ness embodied in 
so-called “postmodern” artworks and their very unordinary price tags.66 Thus, 
Warhol’s  boxes  are  like  consumer  products  and  yet  not  like  consumer 
products. The differentiating factor between an ordinary Brillo box and the box 
you  buy  from  Warhol  is  none  other  than  the  Warhol  stamp  promising 
authenticity—that  this  is  a  “real  Warhol.”67  In  fact,  that  is  the  only 
differentiating  factor.  The  “artist’s  hand”  may  have  been  erased  in  the 
production of the object, but only to resurface ever more markedly in the stamp 
bearing  his  signature.  Or,  as  art  historian  Isabelle  Graw  emphasizes,  though 
artists today might employ a staff of assistants, their works nonetheless “bear 
the  mark  of  the  artist’s  own  studio/factory/enterprise.”68  Thus,  “[t]he  artist’s 
signature remains intact, and this is the place where the promise of originality 
essential for art is upheld.”69 

As  Graw  explains,  Warhol’s  statements—for  instance,  that  his  assistant 
Brigid Polk “actually painted his pictures”—“can be read as a provocative break 
with  the  principle  of  ‘authorship.’”70  But  Graw  also  points  out  that  such 
disclamations  of  the  artist’s  connection  with  a  work  can  have  an  economic 
effect  as  well,  causing  widespread  alarm  amongst  buyers.71  After  Warhol 
suggested Polk’s hand, and not his, was behind his work, “Warhol’s German 
collectors 
immediately  alarmed  and  feared  for  the 

in  particular  were 

 

66.   The Brillo boxes are exact reproductions of their grocery store counterparts. See STAFF  OF 
ANDY  WARHOL  MUSEUM,  ANDY  WARHOL,  365  TAKES:  THE  ANDY  WARHOL  MUSEUM 
COLLECTION 35 (2004) (“The process involved making wooden replicas of the original boxes, 
painting them, and then silkscreening the commercial text and imagery. The finished box 
sculptures were virtually indistinguishable from their cardboard models.”). 

67.   Interestingly,  Warhol’s  Brillo  boxes  have  recently  been  the  subject  of  an  authenticity 
investigation in which more than one hundred Brillo boxes have now been determined to be 
mere “copies.” The differentiating factor between these downgraded copies and the “real” 
Warhol Brillo boxes is, according to the Andy Warhol Art Authentication Board, that the 
copies were not “made by Andy Warhol, to his specifications or under his supervision; and 
there  is  no  known  documentation  that  Warhol  authorised  their  production.”  Clemens 
Bomsdorf & Melanie Gerlis, Warhol Brillo Boxes Downgraded to “Copies,” ART NEWSPAPER, 
Oct. 21, 2010, http://www.theartnewspaper.com/articles/Warhol-Brillo-boxes-downgraded 
-to-copies/21573. 

68.   ISABELLE GRAW, HIGH PRICE: ART BETWEEN THE MARKET AND CELEBRITY CULTURE 25 (trans. 

Nicholas Grindell, 2009). 

69.   Id. 
70.   Id. at 186. 
71.   Id. 

232 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

authenticity  of  their  paintings.  Warhol  was  obliged  to  issue  an  official 
declaration correcting this claim in order to avoid works being returned.”72 

The art world’s obsession with the artist’s stamp of authenticity,73 in some 
way meant to reflect the personality or intent of the artist, is thus no different 
from  consumers’  attitudes  toward  luxury  cars  and  Louis  Vuitton  handbags. 
One need only think of the certificates of authenticity issued by luxury goods 
makers,  neatly  packaged  within  every  $2,000  bag,  and,  ironically,  often 
counterfeited.74 Hence, trademark law works vigilantly to protect these indicia 
of high-class consumer culture from dilution, passing off, and counterfeiting—
all  of  which  could  harm  the  “uniqueness”  of  the  original  (its  “arresting 
uniqueness,”  “singularity,”  and  “identity,”  together  constituting  a  mark’s 
“selling  power”).75  For  the  same  reasons  that  a  trademarked  item’s  “selling 
power”  stems  from  the  promise  of  its  singularity,  art’s  peculiarly  high  value 
“derive[s]  from  a  range  of  factors:  singularity,  arthistorical  verdict,  artist’s 
reputation,  promise  of  originality,  prospect  of  duration,  claim  to  autonomy, 
intellectual acumen.”76 As we will see, modern artists are keenly responsive to 
these  factors  controlling  the  high  price  of  art  objects,  and  consciously 
manipulate them to their benefit in creating a global artistic “brand.” 

 

72.   Id. 
73.   Even the nineteenth-century artist Auguste Rodin took this view of authenticity as merely 
the  granting  of  authority  to  produce  and  then  sell  a  sculpture  with  his  name  on  it:  “He 
recognized as authentic only those bronze casts he had authorized. All others he condemned 
as  counterfeit.”  ROSALIND  E.  KRAUSS,  Introductory  Note  to  Sincerely  Yours,  in  THE 
ORIGINALITY OF THE AVANT-GARDE AND OTHER MODERNIST MYTHS 171, 171 (7th prtg. 1991). 
74.   For example, eBay’s refusal to require its sellers to include certificates of authenticity with 
the sale of luxury items contributed to the Tribunal de Commerce of Paris’s ultimate finding 
that it had not done enough to combat counterfeit sales. Christian Dior Couture/eBay Inc., 
eBay International AG, Tribunal de commerce [TC]  [commerce court] Paris, 1e ch., June 
30, 2008, JurisData 2008-364501 (Fr.). 

75.   Barton  Beebe,  The  Semiotic  Analysis  of  Trademark  Law,  51  UCLA  L.  REV.  621,  681  (2004) 
(quoting  Frank  I.  Schechter,  The  Rational  Basis  of  Trademark  Protection,  40  HARV.  L.  REV. 
813, 827, 830-31 (1927)). 

76.   GRAW, supra note 68, at 28. 

 

233 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

B. The Artist as Brand: From “Reputational Externalities”77 to 

 Consumer Confusion 

1. Identity as Branding 

What  does  the  contemporary  artwork’s  “promise  of  originality”  mean?  It 
might no longer mean novelty, artistic merit, skill, or bold, artistic gestures à la 
the  Abstract  Expressionism of the 1950s,78 but it now arises sui  generis from 
the very existence of the artist’s signature. That is the simple answer. The truth 
of it, however, is that behind that one signature lies an entire realm of carefully 
plotted, well-played maneuvers most often manifested in the body of an artist’s 
work. These maneuvers are responsible for crafting a deliberate public image, 
the success or failure of which is reflected directly in the market price for the 
artist’s work. The desire to control one’s work by resisting curatorial dictates or 
mutilation  at  the  hands  of  an  avaricious  buyer,  which  is  at  the  heart  of  the 
moral right of integrity, is not unique to artists. As Laura Heymann has argued 
about the importance of reputation construction, “This desire for control ‘is an 
assertion of autonomy,’ an attempt to engage in self-identity creation, whether 
by individuals [an average person] or by firms [a corporation], and a resistance 
to definition by others.”79 

Moral  rights  scholarship  has  traditionally  conceived  of  reputation  as  a 
deeply  personal  connection  between  the  artist  and  work.  But  the  concept  of 
reputation can now be reformulated to signify an artist’s strategic choices  on 
how best to efficiently trade on  his public  image,80 just as trademark owners 
trade  on  their  “goodwill”  (a  term  used  in  trademark  law  to  denote  favorable 
public regard).81 Heymann points out that reputation can also serve as a user 
 

77.   This is Hansmann and Santilli’s term for the idea that damaging just one of an artist’s works 

imposes costs on his other works as well. See supra notes 49-52 and accompanying text. 

78.   As  has  been  well  documented,  postmodernism  killed  off  these  notions.  For  the  definitive 
primer  on  postmodern  art  and  culture,  see  FREDRIC  JAMESON,  POSTMODERNISM,  OR,  THE 
CULTURAL LOGIC OF LATE CAPITALISM (1991). 

79.   Laura  A.  Heymann,  The  Law  of  Reputation  and  the  Interest  of  the  Audience,  52  B.C.  L.  REV. 
1341,  1358  (2011)  (quoting  Thomas  Gibbons,  Defamation  Reconsidered,  16  O.J.L.S.  587,  589 
(1996)). 

80.   In Professors Hansmann and Santilli’s economic justification for moral rights, they suggest 
that “an artist may identify with his works as with his children: prize them for their present 
character and not want that character changed.” Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 102. 
If the work’s character were to change, the artist would then experience “subjective personal 
anguish” from “seeing his work abused.” Id. 

81.   This goodwill could be due to a number of factors: clever advertising, good quality, or mass 
marketing.  See  RESTATEMENT  (THIRD)  OF  UNFAIR  COMPETITION  §  9  (1995)  (“If  the 

234 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

signal,  “traded  or  borrowed  based  on  economically  motivated  transactions  in 
which  the  transfer  of  reputational  value  is,  in  large  part,  the  point  of  the 
agreement,”  as  is  the  case  with  luxury  goods,  which  “are  typically  purchased 
not simply because of the higher quality of those goods but also to indicate to 
others that the purchaser is a person of means who can afford high-quality or 
high-status goods.”82 

Others have long noted the inextricable link between an artist’s reputation 
or identity and the value of his artwork.83 William Landes and Richard Posner, 
for example, have suggested trademark redress, in the form of a “passing off” 
action  for  “confusingly  similar  copies  of  original  works,  unless  they  carry  a 
clear  disclaimer  of  authenticity,”  because  they  “violate  the  original  artist’s 
trademark  in  his  instantly  recognizable  style.”84  I  would  like  to  tweak  for  a 
moment how we might think of an artist’s “instantly recognizable style.” In the 
contemporary  era,  style  might  be  referred  to  as  stylized—a  fabricated 
construction,  a  deliberate  posing  by  the  artist  to  actively  engage  in  public 
identity-making.85  That  is,  we  must  shift  how  we  think  about  style  from  an 
authentic, real manifestation of an artist’s inner being86 to a carefully plotted, 
deliberate construction that can be said to be made up of only specific objects 
that the artist has placed into the stream of commerce with his “brand” affixed. 
This shift is important, for it subtly alters the dialogue supporting moral rights 
from one of religious reverence for the artist’s “original meaning”87 or “original 

 

trademark  owner  succeeds  in  creating  a  favorable  image  for  its  trademark  in  the 
marketplace, the mark itself can become a significant factor in stimulating sales. This ability 
of a mark to generate good will through advertising has also gained recognition under the 
law of trademarks.”). 

82.   Heymann, supra note 79, at 1362. 
83.   See,  e.g.,  Hansmann  &  Santilli,  supra  note  15,  at  104  (noting  that  adversely  affecting  an 
artist’s reputation can also adversely affect the prices of his works); Gladys Engel Lang & 
Kurt Lang, Recognition and Renown: The Survival of Artistic Reputation, 94 AM. J. SOC. 79, 105 
(1988) (recognizing that “the name attached to a work of art functions much like a brand 
label”). 

84.   WILLIAM M. LANDES & RICHARD A. POSNER, THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF INTELLECTUAL 
PROPERTY  LAW  259  (2003).  This  remedy,  however,  is  rife  with  problems.  See  infra 
Subsection IV.A.2. 

85.   This is so  because postmodernism has called into question the extent  to which “a unique 
personality and individuality . . . can be expected to generate its own unique vision of the 
world.”  Frederic  Jameson,  Postmodernism  and  Consumer  Society,  in  THE  ANTI-AESTHETIC: 
ESSAYS  ON  POSTMODERN  CULTURE,  supra  note  57,  at  127,  131.  In  other  words,  we  can  no 
longer believe in the unmistakability or uniqueness of a style. 

86.   See MERRYMAN ET AL., supra note 11, at 423. 
87.   See Kwall, supra note 44, at 1986. 

 

235 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

creation”  to  a  concern  for  dilution  or  misrepresentation  of  the  artist’s  brand 
construction via modification, distortion, or mutilation. 

the 

While  prior  scholars  have  noted 

importance  of  reputational 
externalities  to  both  the  artist’s  goodwill  and  the  public’s  right  not  to  be 
defrauded in the buying of artworks,88 these ideas nonetheless presume some 
“analogy between the work and its maker.”89 That is, the prior literature has 
assumed that for a work to be labeled a “Warhol,” for example, the artist must 
have in some sense created it, rather than “signed off” on it. As Hansmann and 
Santilli  see  it,  to  merely  sign  a  work  one  did  not  actually  “create”  or  “make” 
would  be  a  deception  of  the  public  writ  large.90  But  certainly,  Duchamp’s 
signing  off  on  a  urinal  (which  he  did  not  make)  and  then  calling  it  art  has 
erased the belief that an artist must have “created” the work he now touts as 
his.  Now  we  see  Artist  X’s  “creation”  of  the  box  of  brown  clothes,  lovingly 
compiled  by  his  assistants  from  hand-me-downs  purchased  at  the  Salvation 
Army.91 

All  these  examples  should  not  bother  us  if  we  consider  the  artist’s  name 
merely  as  source-identifying  or  “authenticating”  rather  than  indicative  of 
authorial  touch,  and  reputation  as  commercial  goodwill  rather  than  personal 
cachet.  As  we  will  see  below,  the  rise  of  the  “contingent”  art  object—easily 
reproducible, mass manufactured, and industrially made—severs the presumed 
personal connection between author and work. 

 

88.   See, e.g., Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 107. 
89.   ROSALIND E. KRAUSS, Introduction, in THE ORIGINALITY  OF  THE AVANT-GARDE  AND OTHER 

MODERNIST MYTHS, supra note 73, at 1, 3. 

90.   See Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 107 (“The right of integrity might to some extent 
serve  to  protect  the  public  .  .  .  .  But  this  is  perhaps  best  seen  as  an  incidental  and  not  a 
primary function of the right of integrity, because the doctrine does not give the public any 
protection when the artist himself participates in the deception . . . .”); see also id. at 107 n.37 
(“For example, both [Giorgio] De Chirico and [Salvador] Dali were said to have signed—
presumably for compensation—paintings actually created by other artists.”). 

91.   I do not mean to suggest, of course, that the phenomenon of merely “signing off” on a work 
is unique to the contemporary sphere. Even Auguste Rodin was famously known to have 
had little hand in the actual creation of his sculptures: “Much of it was done in foundries to 
which  Rodin  never  went  while  the  production  was  in  progress;  he  never  worked  on  or 
retouched  the  waxes  from  which  the  final  bronzes  were  cast.”  ROSALIND  E.  KRAUSS,  The 
Originality  of  the  Avant-Garde,  in  THE  ORIGINALITY  OF  THE  AVANT-GARDE  AND  OTHER 
MODERNIST MYTHS, supra note 73, at 151, 153. And, perhaps most blasphemously, Rodin had 
granted  the  French  nation  the  right  to  make  posthumous  editions  of  his  work  from  his 
estate’s plasters. Id. at  151. However, the practice of signing off on or merely approving  a 
work is certainly more prominent in the contemporary age. See infra Section II.C. 

236 
 

 
the artist as brand 

2. The Contingent Art Object 

 

Art historian Martha Buskirk points out that moral rights, or, as she calls 
them, “personality” rights, “have, if anything, gained in significance for works 
from  which  traditional  markers  of  touch  or  presence  have  been  excluded.”92 
Buskirk  traces  the  rise,  beginning  in  the  1960s,  of  what  she  terms  the 
contemporary  “contingent  object”93—that  is,  an  art  object  made  from 
industrial  materials,  easily  fabricated  and  reproduced,  and  highly  context 
dependent.  In  the  new  art  world  of  the  contingent  object,  Buskirk  explains, 
“[a]dherence to external conventions that limit and control the production of 
otherwise inherently reproducible works is essential in order for such works to 
be collected in the context of a system based on the importance of originality 
and rarity.”94 To give just one telling example: In 1989, the Ace Gallery in Los 
Angeles wanted to borrow a piece by Donald Judd and another by Carl Andre 
from Italian collector Giuseppe Panza for an upcoming exhibit on minimalist 
art. The two pieces were on display in Panza’s villa in Varese, Italy. But rather 
than ship the works from Italy, Panza ordered unauthorized fabrications of the 
Judd  and  Andre  works  instead.  When  the  artists  found  out  about  the 
reproductions, both publicly disclaimed affiliation with the works.95 As we will 
see later in Section III.B, such an incident is highly problematic because it has 
now  increased  the  number  of  Donald  Judds  and  Carl  Andres  on  the  market, 
decreasing  the  scarcity  effect  and  thus  threatening  to  reduce  the  value  of  the 
artists’  other  works.  And  yet  this  instance  is  indicative  of  the  problems 
plaguing the new contingent art object, for which “mechanical reproduction is 
at  the  core,”  and  by  which  “original  works  of  art  [are]  made  increasingly 
through processes in which duplication of the work is controlled not through 
inherent limits on production (most commonly, the skill or touch of the artist) 
but  by  external  limits.”96  Consider  the  shift  from  a  Renaissance  painting, 
labored over by an artist’s paintbrush and bearing the distinctive brushstrokes 
of  his  hand,  to  Judd’s  work  from  Panza’s  villa,  which  is  simply  “an 
uninterrupted row of largely identical five-foot-high galvanized iron plates.”97 
 

92.   BUSKIRK, supra note 16, at 49 (emphasis added). 
93.   Id. at 211-60. 
94.   Id. at 4. 
95.   Id. at 3. 
96.   Id. at 12. Photography, of course, is one of the most obvious categories of work to which this 
applies.  However,  because  VARA  only  protects  photographs  existing  in  200  or  fewer 
consecutively  numbered,  signed  prints,  it  acts  as  an  external  check  on  the  artist’s  own 
potentially dilutive actions, as well. See infra note 149. 

97.   BUSKIRK, supra note 16, at 2. 

 

237 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

The former could in rare instances be copied by a master impostor—the latter, 
whether  in  an  unauthorized  reproduction  or  the  authorized  “original,”  has 
always  been  a  product  of  industrial  fabrication.  Without  internal  checks  on 
reproduction,  only  through  an  external  legal  measure  like  VARA’s  right  of 
attribution  may  the  artist  control  the  work’s  fabrication,  re-fabrication,  and 
subsequent presentation under his name. 

There is yet another reason the artist’s name and reputation matter more 
now in the contemporary art market than they did in the premodern era. In the 
age  of  Duchampian  ready-made  objects  (shovels,  urinals)  presented  as  art, 
context  matters.  That  is,  it  is  important  that  each  object  bearing  the  artist’s 
name  directly  signifies  a  deliberate  artistic  choice—“[p]resentation  under  an 
artist’s name ensures not only that a range of different forms of expression will 
be read as works, but that heterogeneity within that series of works will be read 
as a decision that itself carries meaning.”98 It is precisely the contingent object 
read against the entire series of an artist’s work that illuminates. Martha Buskirk 
acutely  observed  that  “[a]n  earlier  approach  to  the  work  of  art  looked  to  the 
object  itself  for  evidence  about  its  aesthetic.  For  many  contemporary  forms, 
however, understanding how a work of art was realized includes far more than 
a  knowledge  of  artistic  materials  and  their  properties.”99  Indeed,  artists’ 
oeuvres  no  longer  depend  on  stylistic  unity,  as  Landes  and  Posner  have 
assumed.100  The  contingent  art  object  may  now  be  just  one  in  a  highly 
heterogeneous  body  of  works  that  could  include,  to  use  the  example  of  the 
artist Hans Haacke, “materials as various as water evaporating and condensing 
in an acrylic cube, suspended fabric blown by air currents from a fan, chickens 
hatching on a farm in New Jersey, turtles set free in the south of France, and 
many versions of information systems.”101 

C. Authorship, Brand Building, and the Creation of Goodwill 

Because we cannot believe in the sincerity of modern-day (or, if you prefer, 
“postmodern”) artistic creation, it makes no sense to speak of moral rights as 
somehow  closely  guarding  an  artist’s  “spiritual,  non-economic  and  personal 
nature.”102  This  is  because  we  can  no  longer  assume  some  real,  one-to-one 
correlation between the artist and his work (or, a belief that “[t]o mistreat the 
 

98.   Id. at 10. 
99.   Id. at 15 (emphasis added). 
100.  See supra note 84 and accompanying text. 
101.   BUSKIRK, supra note 16, at 129. 
102.  Carter v. Helmsley-Spear, Inc., 71 F.3d 77, 81 (2d Cir. 1995). 

238 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

work of art is to mistreat the artist”103). Instead, the deliberate control an artist 
exerts over his body of work in order to create an identifiable brand for himself 
has replaced personal connection as the hallmark of contemporary art-making. 

The work of artist Damien Hirst offers an exemplary case study of how the 
contemporary artist trades on his brand. Hirst is perhaps most famous for his 
$100 million diamond-encrusted skull, which went on sale at London’s White 
Cube  gallery  in  2007,  to  much  media  hubbub.  While  some  derision  was 
inevitable, other critics were quick to pick up the brilliance of such a maneuver. 
The New York Times pointed out that Hirst, having “made his name by pickling 
sharks, cows, sheep and the like,” and thus “having created his brand,” “found 
he could sell almost anything.”104 In fact, anyone familiar with the new artist-
as-factory model should not be surprised that Hirst is quite honest about his 
level of involvement in his own works—or lack thereof. For example, it is well 
known  that  “[h]e  doesn’t  paint  his  triumphantly  vacuous  spot  paintings.”105 
Like  name-brand  fashion  designers  who  employ  a  host  of  capable  young 
designers toiling in anonymity behind the scenes, the “House of Hirst,” so to 
speak, relies on marketing for its appeal. As one critic notes, “His undeniable 
genius  consists  in  getting  people  to  buy  [the  paintings  he  didn’t  even 
paint].”106 

Yet  for  all  his  bravado,  Hirst,  like  other  mega-celebrity  artists  of  his  age, 
including Jeff Koons and Richard Prince, is trading off of a brand built from 
the  “goodwill”  generated  by  a  collection  of  his  earlier  works.  In  arguing  that 
brand  building  and  skilled  business  acumen  have  taken  on  increased 
importance in the art world today, I am not arguing that such artworks lack all 
artistic  meaning.  Rather,  some  meaning  making  is  necessary,  some  iota  of 
uniqueness  that  will  first  propel  the  artist  to  stardom.  Art  historian  Isabelle 
Graw uses the term “symbolic relevance” to denote an artist’s uncanny ability, 
at  the  beginning  of  his  or  her  career,  to  tap  into  a  specific  condition  of 
consumer capitalism as a form of artistic commentary.107 Koons, for example, 
made his name with his early Banality sculpture series of 1988, which “evoked 
an idealist belief in the redemptive function of art, only to render it absurd once 

 

103.  MERRYMAN ET AL., supra note 11, at 423. 
104.  Alan Riding, Alas, Poor Art Market: A Multimillion-Dollar Head Case, N.Y. TIMES, June 13, 

2007, http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/13/arts/design/13skul.html. 

105.  Germaine Greer, Germaine Greer Note to Robert Hughes: Bob, Dear, Damien Hirst Is Just One of 
Many  Artists  You  Don’t  Get,  GUARDIAN,  Sept.  21,  2008,  http://www.guardian.co.uk 
/artanddesign/2008/sep/22/1. 

106.  Id. 
107.  GRAW, supra note 68, at 49. 

 

239 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

and for all.”108 Similarly, Richard Prince made a name for himself in the late 
1970s with his rephotographed advertisements of “watches, pens, necklaces, or 
living rooms” which “further heighten[ed] the intended appeal of these items 
by  means  of  an  aesthetic  procedure  that  intensifies  the  glow  of  the  original 
image.”109 Graw argues that both examples show that “the market value of an 
artwork can refer to a symbolic relevance attributed to an artist at some earlier 
moment  just  as,  conversely,  symbolic  value  once  attributed  extends  to  future 
works, amounting to a long-term credit.”110 Replace “symbolic value” with the 
term “goodwill,” and what you have is a classic trademark argument in which 
the trademark holder, having shored up his reputation via early successes, can 
now depend on his mark for future profit. That the artist might now employ 
assistants to do the bulk of his work should upset no one—consider trademark 
licensing  or  franchising  schemes.  And  finally,  in  what  is  an  all-too-witting 
acknowledgment  of  the  business  of  art,  California  artist  Dan  Flavin  issues 
graph paper certificates for all his works, “which validate[] the authenticity of 
the  work  with  both  the  artist’s  signature  and  the  imprint  of  a  New  York 
corporate  seal  in  the  name  of  Dan  Flavin,  Ltd.”111  Flavin’s  pieces  frequently 
consist  of  everyday  household  objects  like  fluorescent  light  tubes.  Hence,  in 
using his name as both artistic authority and corporation, the certificates are at 
once  self-consciously  tongue-in-cheek  and  necessary  in  the  world  of  the 
contingent object. Buskirk points out that the “certificates played an important 
role in the marketability of pieces where the physical object was made from off-
the-shelf  elements,” guaranteeing that this light tube is not just any old light 
tube—it is a Flavin original.112 

Returning to Hirst, while it is true that at the time of the diamond skull’s 
‘Hirst  brand’  was  simply  too  established,  essentially 
creation  “[t]he 
guaranteeing symbolic relevance,”113 the creation of the skull itself fulfilled two 
functions  toward  furthering  the  strength  of  the  brand.  First,  it  was 
symbolically relevant, a nodding wink to the vanities of the art world in which, 
indeed, “the price tag is the art.”114 And second, it represented a brilliant public 
relations  move  in  the  ultimate  construction  of  the  Hirst  brand,  now 
synonymous with irreverent excess and purposeful deskilling. 

 

108.  Id. at 53. 
109.  Id. at 49. 
110.   Id. at 55. 
111.   BUSKIRK, supra note 16, at 53. 
112.   Id. at 56. 
113.   GRAW, supra note 68, at 40. 
114.   Riding, supra note 104 (quoting British journalist Nick Cohen). 

240 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

iii. comparing moral rights and trademark law 

So what does this all have to do with moral rights? As I have already noted, 
we  must  begin  by  challenging  our  current  conception  of  moral  rights  as 
protecting a unique set of artists’ interests unlike, and loftier than, any other 
(although  the  term  “moral,”  unfortunately,  does  not  help).115  In  fact,  a  brief 
comparison  of  moral  rights  law  and  trademark  law  will  reveal  many  more 
parallels  than  dissimilarities.  I  find  this  comparison  significant  for  a  few 
reasons, the most obvious being that trademark is meant to regulate consumer 
goods—precisely  what  I  am  arguing  art  objects  are  today.  Secondly,  and 
perhaps more significantly, part of the opposition to moral rights stems from 
the  belief  that  these  rights  are  somehow  unique  compared  to  traditional 
copyright  and  trademark  law.  As  commentators  never  fail  to  point  out, 
American intellectual property law seeks to vindicate the economic, rather than 
the personal, interests of authors.116 My argument is that moral rights, much 
like  trademark  law  (which  I  use  to  encompass  trade  dress117  as  well),  can 
instead regulate a set of distinctly economic rights—both by decreasing search 
costs  for  art  buyers  and  the  art-viewing  public,  and  by  giving  artists  an 
incentive  to  create  without  having  other  actors  unfairly  reap  the  benefits  of 
their goodwill (which, in turn, incentivizes the creation of a consistent, quality 
body  of  work).118  I  will  now  examine  three  unique  trademark  principles  and 
discuss  their  relevance  to  moral  rights:  the  attenuation  of  the  “first  sale 
doctrine,” the Lanham Act’s prohibition against source confusion (or “passing 
off”), and, lastly, the principles of dilution and tarnishment for famous brands. 

 

115.   For a brief discussion of the “assumption embedded in moral rights law . . . that works of 
visual art deserve special treatment in the law because they are especially valuable and unlike 
other objects,” see Adler, supra note 4, at 269. 

116.   See, e.g., Gilliam v. Am. Broad. Cos., 538 F.2d 14, 24 (2d Cir. 1976); Kwall, supra note 43, at 
59-60; see also Hughes, supra note 43, at 662 (observing that other commentators frequently 
discuss intellectual property in terms of economic interests). 

117.   Actionable under section 43(a) of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a) (2006), “trade dress” 
is “a category that originally included only the packaging, or ‘dressing,’ of a product, but . . . 
has  been  expanded  .  .  .  to  encompass  the  design  of  a  product.”  Wal-Mart  Stores,  Inc.  v. 
Samara  Bros.,  Inc.,  529  U.S.  205,  209  (2000)  (explaining  that  “trade  dress  constitutes  a 
‘symbol’ or ‘device’ for [Lanham Act] purposes”). 

118.   The  economic  justifications  for  trademark  law  are  numerous.  See,  e.g.,  Nicholas  S. 
Economides,  The  Economics  of  Trademarks,  78  TRADEMARK  REP.  523  (1988);  Ralph  H. 
Folsom & Larry L. Teply, Trademarked Generic Words, 89 YALE L.J. 1323 (1980); William P. 
Kratzke,  Normative  Economic  Analysis  of  Trademark  Law,  21  MEMPHIS  ST.  U.  L.  REV.  199 
(1991); William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, Trademark Law: An Economic Perspective, 
30 J.L. & ECON. 265 (1987). 

 

241 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

A. Trademark Law and the Attenuation of the “First Sale Doctrine” 

Americans  are  very  protective  of  their  property.  I  mean  the  term 
“protective” to encompass the right to alter it, sell it, destroy it, transfer it—in 
short,  the  belief  that  because  you  now  own  it,  you  should  be  able  to  do 
whatever you’d like with it. Thus, it is unsurprising that American law disposes 
of the notion that a trademark holder might be able to control how an owner 
disposes  of  his  property.  That  idea  was  formally  done  away  with  by  the 
Supreme  Court  in  the  1924  case  Prestonettes,  Inc.  v.  Coty,119  which  established 
what is now known as the “first sale doctrine.” There, the Court held that the 
defendant, who had originally purchased plaintiff’s perfumes, “had a right to 
compound  or  change  what  it  bought,  to  divide  either  the  original  or  the 
modified  product,  and  to  sell  it  so  divided.”120  Since  then,  sellers  in  the 
“aftermarket”  for  goods  (redistributors,  for  example)  have  invoked  the 
doctrine,  sometimes  successfully,  against  trademark  owners’  infringement 
claims.121 

But this defense is not absolute. Courts have held that aftermarket activity 
can constitute trademark infringement, due to a likelihood of confusion on the 
part  of  both  purchasers  and  observers  of  the  redistributed  product.  For 
example,  in  Rolex  Watch,  U.S.A.,  Inc.  v.  Michel  Co.,122  the  Ninth  Circuit 
affirmed the district court’s finding that the behavior of a defendant who sold 
used  Rolex  watches  with  “reconditioned”  or  “customized”  non-Rolex  parts 
under  the  Rolex  trademark  was  “deceptive  and  misleading  .  .  .  and  likely  to 
cause confusion to subsequent or downstream purchasers, as well as to persons 
observing  the  product.”123  Rolex  was  just  one  of  several  cases  holding  that  a 
substantial  alteration  of  the  original  product  may  no  longer  be  sold  with  the 
original trademark.124 

 

119.   264 U.S. 359 (1924). 
120.  Id. at 368. 
121.   See, e.g., Beltronics USA, Inc. v. Midwest Inventory Distribution, LLC, 562 F.3d 1067 (10th 
Cir. 2009); Sebastian Int’l, Inc. v. Longs Drug Stores Corp., 53 F.3d 1073 (9th Cir. 1995); 
Alexander Binzel Corp. v. Nu-Tecsys Corp., 785 F. Supp. 719 (N.D. Ill. 1992); Scarves by 
Vera, Inc. v. Am. Handbags, Inc., 188 F. Supp. 255 (S.D.N.Y. 1960). 

122.   179 F.3d 704 (9th Cir. 1999). 
123.   Id. at 707. 
124.  See also Rolex Watch USA, Inc. v. Meece, 158 F.3d 816 (5th Cir. 1998) (holding that Rolex 
watches “enhanced” with non-Rolex parts infringed on Rolex’s trademark); Bulova Watch 
Co. v. Allerton Co., 328 F.2d 20 (7th Cir. 1964) (holding that refitting Bulova movements 
and dials into non-Bulova diamond-decorated cases resulted in a new product). 

242 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

A trademark owner’s right to enjoin use of its trademark in connection with 
a substantial alteration of its original product is very similar to an artist’s right 
to prevent the distortion,  mutilation, or modification of his work that would 
subsequently be prejudicial to his honor or reputation. The phrase “prejudicial 
to  an  artist’s  honor  or  reputation”  may  seem  tainted  with  traditional  moral 
rights rhetoric, but it need not be so. As discussed in Part I, an artist trades in 
his reputation—for example, that he is a “high art” artist and has sold valuable 
pieces  before  (which  is,  in  fact,  Hirst’s  explanation  for  why  he  can  get  away 
with  selling  art  objects  that  are  “clichés”125).  Reputation  is  what  informs  our 
understanding  of  new  work  that  might  otherwise  remain  context-less  and 
inexplicable, and it is also what art buyers and sellers are implicitly trading off 
of when they sell a box of brown clothes for a five-digit price. That is, the box 
of brown clothes is not valuable on its own, but only becomes valuable in light of 
the  fact  that  it  is  “an  Artist  X  original”  (and,  likewise,  the  fact  that  it  is  “an 
Artist X original” is only significant because of the entire body of work that has 
rendered X an art-world superstar). 

So, then, what if the owner of an artwork decides to cut it up into six pieces 
and  then  sell  the  pieces  separately?  In  what  is  perhaps  the  most  famous  case 
invoked  in  support  of  moral  rights  law,  the  French  artist  Bernard  Buffet 
painted a refrigerator and sold it at a charity auction. A few months later, while 
flipping  through  another  auction  catalog,  Buffet  came  across  a  piece  labeled 
“Still Life and Fruits by Bernard Buffet.” The piece was touted as a painting on 
metal.  However,  upon  closer  inspection,  Buffet  discovered  that  it  was  in  fact 
one of the panels of the auctioned-off refrigerator.126 Apparently, the owner of 
the refrigerator had cut it up into six pieces and attempted to sell the fragments 
separately, “evidently to increase its resale value.”127 This would no doubt be a 
“substantial” alteration that the first sale doctrine does not protect, because it 
would  create  a  likelihood  of  confusion  both  to  the  purchaser  of  Still  Life  and 
Fruits  and  to  any  observer  who  might  see  the  work  displayed.  Indeed,  the 
problem of observer confusion for the fine arts is even more dire than that for 
commodity  goods  because  any  observation  of  the  latter  is  likely  incidental, 
while  works  of  fine  art  are  often  purposefully  displayed  at  gallery  shows, 
loaned to museums, and the like. 

Further, the use of the Buffet name creates significant free-rider problems. 
As the Ninth Circuit explains in another first sale case (in which the defendant 

 

125.   DAMIEN HIRST, NEW RELIGION 7 (2005). 
126.  See John Henry Merryman, The Refrigerator  of Bernard  Buffet, 27 HASTINGS L.J. 1023, 1023 

(1976). 

127.   Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 100. 

 

243 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

had purchased Volkswagen badges and subsequently affixed them to marquee 
labels): 

[Defendant]  contends  that  in  “first  sale”  cases  “the  element  of  ‘free-
riding’  present  in  other  post-purchase  confusion  cases  disappears 
because the producer has paid the price asked by the trademark owner 
for  the  ‘ride.’”  This  contention  misses  the  point.  When  a  producer 
purchases a trademarked product, that producer is not purchasing the 
trademark. Rather, the producer is purchasing a product that has been 
trademarked.  If  a  producer  profits  from  a  trademark  because  of  post-
purchase confusion about the product’s origin, the producer is, to that 
degree, a free-rider.128 

Likewise, the owner who is hoping to increase resale value in his cut-up Buffet 
panels is making an implicit free-rider assumption: that he can do so because 
the Buffet name is valuable, and not because he means to create some newer, 
better work. While this case may strike some as unusual, it is, unfortunately, 
not  unique.  Others  have  cut  up,  for  example,  two  paintings  by  the  French 
painter Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (into ten pieces) and Pablo Picasso’s Trois 
Femmes, which was purchased for $10,000, subsequently cut into five hundred 
one-inch squares, and sold off for over $100 apiece—creating a hearty $40,000 
profit.129  The  clever  “entrepreneur”  behind  the  Trois  Femmes  resale  even 
remarked, “If this thing takes off, we may buy other masters as well and give 
them the chop.”130 

Further,  the  practice  of  cutting  up  art  and  selling  the  pieces  is  especially 
problematic  because  it  decreases  the  scarcity  value  of  the  Buffet  brand,  with 
respect to both the inverse quantity/price relationship (increased supply means 
decreased price) and the “possibility that works of art are a form of ‘collectable’ 
good  whose  value  to  its  owner  derives  in  significant  part  simply  from  its 
scarcity.”131 Inundating the market with piecemeal art in larger quantities than 
the original presents obvious problems for fine artists in particular, who may 
wish to limit the number of goods they place in the market. 

 

128.  Au-Tomotive Gold, Inc. v. Volkswagen of Am., Inc., 603 F.3d 1133, 1138 (9th Cir. 2010). 
129.  See MERRYMAN ET AL., supra note 11, at 439. 
130.  Id. 
131.   Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 111 n.49. 

244 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

B. Source Identification and Source Confusion 

In  the  prior  Section’s  discussion  of  the  first  sale  doctrine,  I  have  glossed 
over  the  “likelihood  of  confusion”  standard  that  is  necessary  to  prove 
trademark infringement in an action under section 43(a) of the Lanham Act.132 
The standard requires that an infringer cause confusion, mistake, or deception 
with regard to “the affiliation, connection, or association of such person with 
another  person,  or  as  to  the  origin,  sponsorship,  or  approval  of  his  or  her 
goods, services, or commercial activities by another person.”133 The language of 
“likelihood  of  confusion”  actually  serves  as  a  helpful  way  to  reframe  the 
dialogue  regarding  authorial  intent  from  one  of  personal  interests134  to 
economic ones. 

That is, the very idea of a discernable “authorial intent” worth protecting 
has  come  under  assault  within  postmodern  art  circles.  Commentators  have 
argued  that  it  makes  no  sense  to  speak  of  “intent”  as  if  there  were  a  single 
author who controlled the end product,135 and further, that authorial intent is 
impossible to determine,136 so that a work should exist ab initio, as if divorced 
from the author.137 The notion of lack of authorial intent makes sense. Authors 
all build on what came before, so in that sense there is no “single” author of a 
work, and once a work has left the artist’s hands, it can and probably should be 
open  to  all  sorts  of  interpretations.  Yet  the  “author-as-construct”  framework 
provides an easy weapon against moral rights law and its assumed correlation 
between artist and work. If we sever the connection altogether, then an artist 

 

132.   15 U.S.C. § 1125(a)(1)(A) (2006). 
133.   Id. 
134.   See,  e.g.,  Roberta  Rosenthal  Kwall,  Fame,  73  IND.  L.J.  1,  19  (1997)  (arguing  that  both  the 
right of publicity and moral rights “seek to protect the integrity of texts by rejecting fluidity 
of textual interpretation by the public in favor of the author’s interpretation”). 

135.   The classic text is ROLAND BARTHES, The Death of the Author, in IMAGE-MUSIC-TEXT 142, 146 
(Stephen  Heath  trans.,  1977),  in  which  Barthes  argues  that  the  only  power  of  the 
contemporary author is to “mix writings.” See also Peter Jaszi, Toward a Theory of Copyright: 
The  Metamorphoses  of  “Authorship,”  1991  DUKE  L.J.  455,  459  (arguing  that  authorship  is  a 
socially constructed category reliant on the Romantic notion of an inspired genius); Martha 
Woodmansee, The Genius and the Copyright: Economic and Legal Conditions of the Emergence of 
the “Author,” 17 EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY STUD. 425, 428-30 (1984) (same). 

136.  See Adler, supra note 4, at 277-78 (“The belief—that we can discern, let alone police, artistic 
intention,  that  it  is  necessarily  relevant  to  the  meaning  of  a  work—is  premised  on  naïve 
theories of interpretation.”). 

137.   Vladimir  Nabokov,  for  example,  had  proclaimed  in  the  Afterword  to  Lolita  that  it  “is 
childish  to  study  a  work  of  fiction  in  order  to  gain  information  .  .  .  about  the  author.” 
VLADIMIR NABOKOV, THE ANNOTATED LOLITA 316 (Alfred Appel ed., 1991) (1958). 

 

245 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

certainly  does  not  possess  any  more  right  to  control  the  work  than,  for 
example, a museum curator or a clever critic who has figured out a way to alter 
the work so as to make it more profitable.138 

Yet the critique of authorial intent can also be deployed in favor of moral 
rights, if one considers the author not acting as the ultimate creator but instead 
serving a source-identifying function. In other words, when we say “this is a 
Warhol,”  we  mean  to  conjure  up  all  sorts  of  associations  with  the  Warhol 
brand—not  least  of  which  is  that  the  artwork  is  extremely  high  in  price,  but 
also that it may be, for example, purposefully deskilled, playful, or irreverent. 
All of these associations emerge from the deliberate choices Warhol has made 
in putting a specific body of work into the stream of commerce, and hence, into 
the  public  eye.  The  notion  of  “artist  name  as  source-identifying  function” 
makes  sense  in  a  contemporary  art  market  in  which  assistants  are  frequently 
the ones actually “making” or “creating” the art.139 Just as a fashion designer 
would place his trademark on a host of items designed by a team of assistants, 
so the artist himself performs the legitimating function of merely signing off 
on the work, and thereby rendering it “a Warhol.” Yet it is misleading to label 
a work “a Warhol” if it has been modified or mutilated and the artist himself 
did not willfully sign off on the modification, for now the artist neither is the 
“origin”  of  the  product  (i.e.,  the  mutilated  version  did  not  come  from  the 
Warhol  “factory”)  nor  professes  to  sponsor  or  approve  it  in  any  way.  A 
mutilation  thus  not  only  allows  another  party  to  reap  the  financial  rewards 
associated  with  the  famous  Warhol  name,  but  it  also  imposes  negative 
externalities on the art consumer by increasing search costs.140 

To  return  to  Buffet’s  refrigerator,  the  labeling  of  one  of  the  refrigerator 
panels as “Still Life and Fruits by Bernard Buffet” is misleading, because Buffet 
 

138.   This is the case of famous modernist critic Clement Greenberg “stripping” the paint from 
David Smith sculptures, thus actually rendering them more valuable than the painted ones. 
See  Sarah  Hamill,  Polychrome  in  the  Sixties:  David  Smith  and  Anthony  Caro,  in  ANGLO-
AMERICAN  EXCHANGE  IN  POSTWAR  SCULPTURE, 1945-1975,  at  91,  93  (Rebecca  Peabody  ed., 
2011) (citing Rosalind Krauss, Changing the Work of David Smith, 62 ART IN AM. 30 (1974)). 
However, it does not matter much if Greenberg created more market value, for the sculpture 
may  no  longer  accurately  be  branded  a  David  Smith.  Smith  evokes  this  concept  of 
misrepresentation in an angry letter to ARTnews: “Since my sculpture 17h’s . . . during the 
process of sale and resale, has suffered a willful act of vandalism . . . . I renounce it as my 
original work and brand it a ruin. My name cannot be attributed to it, and I shall exercise 
my legal rights against anyone making this representation.” MERRYMAN  ET  AL., supra note 
11, at 441. 

139.  See supra note 68 and accompanying text. 
140.  Cf.  Qualitex  Co.  v.  Jacobson  Prod.  Co.,  514  U.S.  159,  163-64  (1995)  (stating  trademark’s 
goals as reducing consumer search costs and insuring “a producer that it . . . will reap the 
financial, reputation-related rewards associated with a desirable product”). 

246 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

neither  was—to  borrow  the  Supreme  Court’s  definition  of  “origin”  in  the 
Lanham  Act  context—“the  producer  of  the  tangible  product  sold  in  the 
marketplace,” nor had he “commissioned or assumed responsibility for (‘stood 
behind’)  production  of  the  physical  product.”141  Buffet  created  a  painted 
refrigerator.  By  dicing  the  refrigerator  up  into  six  parts,  the  owner  has 
subsequently created six new works, so that he, and not Buffet, is now the new 
producer  or  “source.”  Thus  the  owner  should  not  be  permitted  to  unfairly 
profit off of the Bernard Buffet name in selling the new works.142 

C. Famous Artists, Famous Brands: A Brief Remark on Dilution 

Throughout  this  Note,  I  have  mentioned  a  trademark  owner’s  right  to 
prevent “dilution” of his brand in passing. In this Section, I shall discuss briefly 
the rights to prevent dilution by blurring and dilution by tarnishment, both of 
which apply only to famous marks.143 The former, as defined by the Lanham 
Act, prevents the association between the defendant’s mark and a famous mark 
that  would  impair  the  distinctiveness  of  the  famous  mark.144  The  latter, 
meanwhile,  prohibits  the  association  between  the  defendant’s  mark  and  a 
famous mark that would harm the reputation of the famous mark.145 While the 
only provision of VARA requiring an artist to first prove his own “fame” is the 
right against destruction (and there, he must prove the “recognized stature” of 
a specific work, not his general fame), the dilution right provides an interesting 
framework  for  understanding  the  right  of  attribution  and  the  right  of 
integrity’s  shared  requirement  that  any  distortion  or  modification  be 
prejudicial to the artist’s honor or reputation. 

First, this requirement suggests that the right of integrity standing on its 
own—that is, as applied to a modified work that does not include the artist’s 
name—nonetheless  requires  an  association  between  the  modified,  unmarked 
work and the artist. Otherwise, if no association arises, it would be impossible 
for any harm to the artist’s reputation to occur. Thus it is likely that the right of 
integrity would apply only in cases where a “dilution by blurring” occurs—that 
is,  where  the  unmarked  work  would  impair  the  distinctiveness  of  a  famous 
 

141.   Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., 539 U.S. 23, 31-32 (2003). 
142.  It should be noted, too, that Buffet was an early example of the artist-as-businessman, as art 
critics in his day called him the “Rembrandt of the stock market speculators.” GRAW, supra 
note 68, at 194 (quoting Clemns Krümmel, Der Maler Bernard Buffet—Zwischen Verniss und 
Rehabilitation, TEXTE ZUR KUNST, Mar. 2002, at 85). 

143.   15 U.S.C. § 1125 (2006). 
144.  Id. § 1125(a)(1)(A). 
145.   Id. § 1125(a)(1)(B). 

 

247 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

mark. This would apply more to artists painting in distinctive styles that would 
rise  to  the  level  of  trade  dress  protection  than  for  artists  who  have  more 
heterogeneous, eclectic oeuvres.146 Artists with more “instantly recognizable”147 
styles, therefore, are far more likely to evoke associations between an unmarked 
work that nonetheless retains much of the artist’s distinct style and the artist’s 
name. 

Second,  some  might  object  that  VARA’s  use  of  the  phrase  “prejudicial  to 
the artist’s honor or reputation” is strongly tinged with personhood rhetoric.148 
But it need not be so. When a famous artist polices his mark, he is doing more 
than protecting his own reputation. He is also protecting other owners of his 
work  by  ensuring  that  the  brand  they  own  stays  unique  and  untarnished.  In 
effect,  the  artist  acts  as  the  “least  cost  avoider”  in  policing  the  mark  against 
dilution,  exempting  owners  who  have  an  economic  interest  in  protecting  the 
value of their work from needing to do so themselves.149 Likewise, in the case 
of  an  up-and-coming  artist,  the  artist  can  protect  buyers’  investment  in  his 
work, even if his work has not yet acquired distinctiveness (which trademark 
law  refers  to  as  “secondary  meaning”).150  That  is,  while  dilution  by  blurring 
may not be possible because there is no “distinctiveness” to impair, a dilution-
by-tarnishment-type injury could nonetheless occur if the modification is likely 
to  harm  the  artist’s  reputation.  The  more  untarnished  a  young  artist’s 
reputation  stays,  the  more  likely  it  is  that  the  goodwill  accrued  early  in  his 
career can be converted to a longer-term cash-out for both the artist and earlier 
buyers of his work.151 

It  has  been  my  hope  throughout  this  Part  to  sever  moral  rights  from  the 
strong personhood arguments that seem to untether VARA from the economic 
goals  of  American  copyright  law.  In  an  age  in  which  art  has  become  more 
 

146.  See id. § 1125(c); supra notes 98-101 and accompanying text. 
147.   LANDES  &  POSNER,  supra  note  84,  at  259  (contemplating  the  possibility  of  trademark 

protection in an artist’s distinctive style); see supra note 84 and accompanying text. 

148.  17 U.S.C. § 106A (2006). 
149.  Thanks to Shaun Mahaffy for this point. Of course, it is possible that the artist’s own actions 
might  have  a  deleterious  effect  on  an  owner  of  his  work.  A  recent  lawsuit  brought  by  a 
collector of photographer William Eggleston’s works alleges that Eggleston has diluted the 
resale  value  of  the  collector’s  works  by  issuing  new  large-scale  prints  of  them.  See  Kelly 
Crow,  Collector  Sues  Artist  over  Photographs,  WALL  ST.  J.,  Apr.  5,  2012,  http://online 
.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303299604577324073338603692.html.  However,  I 
note  here  that  VARA  serves  as  an  interesting  external  check  on  an  artist’s  own  dilutive 
actions. If Eggleston were to issue more than two hundred prints of a specific photograph, 
he would lose his VARA rights. 

150.  See infra note 170 and accompanying text. 
151.   See supra Section II.B. 

248 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

commoditized than ever, VARA’s moral rights regime is even more essential, 
precisely because of its trademark-like ability to protect an artist’s brand from 
subsequent  dilution  and  free  riding.  By  repositioning  romantic  concepts  like 
authorial reputation, intent, and honor as market concerns (of avoiding post-
sale  consumer  confusion,  promoting  truthful  source  identification,  and 
encouraging active mark policing), moral rights can do for art what trademark 
law  has  long  done  for  other  commodities.  Yet  some  might  wonder  whether 
copyright—which  has  long  endowed  artists,  writers,  and  filmmakers  with  a 
broad,  comprehensive  set  of  rights—is  already  sufficient  for  accomplishing 
what VARA does. I take up this question below. 

iv. who’s afraid of moral rights? 

Critics  might  object  that  the  mere  existence  of  a  theoretical  connection 
between art and commerce, or between moral rights and trademark law, does 
not  necessarily  warrant  an  unprecedented  expansion  of  American  intellectual 
property law in the form of the VARA regime. In this Part, I question whether 
the United States can achieve the goals of VARA within a traditional copyright 
or trademark regime. I then conclude by considering the broader question of 
the public interest, which copyright law has long been said to benefit.152 

A. Are There Alternatives? 

A  question  frequently  asked  of  moral  rights  law  is:  what  is  it  about  art 
(meaning  fine  art,  and  not  “the  arts,”  which  could  potentially  refer  to  film, 
music,  and  books)  that  warrants  special  protection?153  We  could  answer  this 
question with lofty statements about the importance of art to our heritage, our 
culture, and society as a whole—and in many ways, we have done just that.154 
But  this  is  a  debatable  point,  and  the  extent  to  which  the  vulgarities  and 
materialist  excesses  of  the  contemporary  art  market,  as  outlined  above,  have 
destroyed that notion is also up for debate. A better question to ask would be 
whether  the  fine  arts  lack  important  protections  in  a  traditional  intellectual 
property regime. I believe that they do. 
 

152.   The Copyright Clause in the Constitution empowers Congress to “promote the Progress of 
Science . . . by securing for limited Times to Authors . . . the exclusive Right to their . . . 
Writings.” U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8, cl. 8. The notion of “Progress” is traditionally linked to 
the public interest. 

153.   See Adler, supra note 4, at 295. 
154.   See  H.R.  REP.  NO.  101-514,  at  6-7  (1990),  reprinted  in  1990  U.S.C.C.A.N.  6915,  6915-17 

(extolling the merits of art for society). 

 

249 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

1. Copyright and Its Limitations 

As  Hansmann  and  Santilli  point  out,  “[C]opyright  is  more  useful  to 
authors of literary works than it is to visual artists as a means of controlling the 
way  in  which  their  work  is  presented  to  the  public.”155  Because  “copyright 
covers  principally  reproductions,”  the  fine  artist  has  “much  less  control  over 
the uses made of his original painting or sculpture once that object is sold by 
the  artist.”156  Copyright  would 
significant 
modifications of the sold work (under the derivative works right157), and it does 
not protect against the destruction or improper display of that work at all.158 

likely  only  protect  against 

Indeed,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  unique  position  of  visual  artists  in  the 
intellectual  property  sphere  derives  from  the  high  premium  placed  on  the 
original  itself.  This  characteristic  of  the  art  market  renders  it  simply  not 
analogous to the markets for literature, film, or music. The justifications and 
critiques  of  the  copyright  regime  have  often  been  predicated  on  solving  the 
problem  of  a  high  first-copy  cost  with  little  to  no  cost  in  reproduction. 
Copyright,  therefore,  must  create  an  “artificial”  property  right  in  a  non-
rivalrous good.159 However, because the marginal cost of making a copy of the 
original is zero or slightly greater than zero, there are inevitably inefficiencies 
because  the  buyer  must  pay  above  marginal  cost  in  order  for  the  seller  to 
recoup the costs of making the original.160 Hence the protracted debates about 
how  much  copyright  protection  is  “enough”  protection  to  incentivize  the 
creation of that first copy: How many copies should the owner be allowed to 
profit from so that he may create at all?161 
 

155.   Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 114. 
156.  Id. 
157.   See infra note 164 and accompanying text. 
158.   See H.R. REP. NO. 101-514, at 9, reprinted in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6915, 6918-19 (“Under the 
American copyright system, an artist who transfers a copy of his or her work to another may 
not, absent a contractual agreement, prevent that person from destroying the copy or collect 
damages after the fact. Further, with respect to modifications of a work, only an artist who 
retains  the  copyright  in  his  or  her  work  is  able  to  invoke  title  17  rights  in  defense  of  the 
integrity  of  that  work,  and  then  only  where  a  modification  amounts  to  the  creation  of  a 
derivative work.”). 

159.  Non-rivalrous goods can be shared without any loss in value. For instance, many can listen 
to the same MP3 of a song at once; my listening to this copy does not prohibit your listening 
to the exact same copy. 

160.  See NEIL WEINSTOCK NETANEL, COPYRIGHT’S PARADOX 84-86 (2008). 
161.   See Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186, 248 (2003) (Breyer, J., dissenting) (stating that costs to 
the public imposed by the Copyright Term Extension Act and the royalties it generates “may 
be higher than necessary to evoke creation of the relevant work”). 

250 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

Visual artists cannot hope to benefit much, if at all, from this copy-based 
regime.162 Almost all the market value for their work resides within the original 
copy. This distinctive feature of visual art creates what I have termed “the cult 
of the authentic” that has rendered Benjamin’s prediction of a world without 
fetishism for the original163 simply untrue for the fine arts (though visual art 
still permits secondary markets for prints, mugs, tote bags, postcards, and the 
like). This renders an art object similar to a luxury good in that it is rivalrous 
(once I own this Hirst, you may not own the same Hirst). At the same time, 
the art object is even more covetable for its scarcity (this is the only diamond 
skull that is out there, while Prada may have made at least five thousand of its 
Spring 2011 bags). 

Given  the  inadequacy  of  a  traditional  copyright  regime  governing 
subsequent  copies  rather  than  the  original  itself,  then,  it  seems  that  moral 
rights, or a regime according the artist more control over the original, serves as 
an adequate solution for the problems arising from the uniqueness of the fine 
art  object.164  That  is,  the  moral  rights  regime  shifts  the  incentive  mechanism 
from  a  promise  of  control  over  the  copies  to  a  promise  of  control  over  the 
original—which is, really, the only copy that matters to the fine artist. 

2. Why Not Just Use Traditional Trademark Law? 

As  noted  throughout  this  Note,  numerous  scholars  have  suggested 
trademark  redress  for  artists.165  However,  courts  do  not  seem  especially 
 

162.  See  H.R.  REP.  NO.  101-514,  at  9,  reprinted  in  1990  U.S.C.C.A.N.  6915,  6919  (“Motion 
pictures  and  other  audiovisual  works  are  generally  produced  and  exploited  in  multiple 
copies.  They  are 
licensed  for 
broadcasting,  shown  on  airplanes,  and  sold  as  videocassettes.  Each  market  has  its  own 
commercial  and  technological  configuration  that  affects  how  the  work  will  appear  when 
presented. In contrast, the works of visual art covered by H.R. 2690 are limited to originals: 
works  created  in  single  copies  or  in  limited  editions.  They  are  generally  not  physically 
transformed to suit the purposes of different markets.”). 

leased  for  theatrical  and  non-theatrical  exhibition, 

163.  See Benjamin, supra note 58. 
164.  Hansmann and Santilli have also suggested that a significant alteration of a work may result 
in a violation of the “derivative works” right. See Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 114-
16. Landes and Posner have also made this comparison between the integrity right and the 
derivative works right. See LANDES & POSNER, supra note 84, at 279. 

165.  See  Hansmann  &  Santilli,  supra  note  15,  at  116  (“Further  expansive  interpretation  of 
trademark  law might  be  sufficient  to  give  artists  the  same  type  of  reputational protection 
afforded  by  the  right  of  integrity.”);  see  also  LANDES  &  POSNER,  supra  note  84,  at  276 
(“Attribution  rights  are  closely  related 
trademark  
infringement . . . so that much of what they seek to prevent is already forbidden . . . .”). 
However, the recent case of Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., 539 U.S. 23 

to  rights  against 

fraud  and 

 

251 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

hospitable  to  this  argument.  John  Henry  Merryman  states  that  there  is  no 
known 

case  in  which  the  Lanham  Act  has  been  used  to  provide  moral  right 
protection to a work of visual art. The closest approach is Visual Artists 
and  Galleries  Association  v.  Various  John  Does,  80  Civ.  4487  (S.D.N.Y. 
1980)  .  .  .  .  There,  Picasso’s  signature  appeared  on  T-shirts  without 
authorization of the artist’s heir, and an action was brought to enjoin the 
manufacture, distribution, or sale under § 43(a) of the Lanham Act.166 

However, as that case involved the literal use of Picasso’s name as a trademark 
on  a  non-art  product,  it  does  little  in  the  way  of  redress  for  alterations  or 
modifications  of  original  artwork.167  The  question  remains  whether  an  actual 
Picasso  painting  that  has  been  cut  up  into  several  pieces  would  still  qualify 
under a section 43(a) action. 

Further,  there  are  other  significant  reasons  that  section  43(a)  is  an 
inadequate solution to the problems addressed by VARA. For one, the Lanham 
Act requires that a name be used in commerce in connection with the sale of 
goods or services, so it would likely not cover situations where a not-for-profit 
museum displays an unauthorized work of art. This was the approach the court 
took 
involved  the 
unauthorized  reproduction  of  an  artist’s  work  in  a  series  of  pamphlets.  The 
district  court  held  that  “[b]ecause  the  pamphlet  was  not  employed  in  the 
‘advertising or promotion’ of goods or services, plaintiff has failed to satisfy a 
prerequisite to invocation of the Lanham Act.”169 

in  Wojnarowicz  v.  American  Family  Ass’n,168  which 

Secondly, both trade dress and personal names (in this case, the name of 
the  artist)  require  secondary  meaning—that  is,  acquired  distinctiveness—in 
order to be actionable as a trademark under section 43(a).170 For artists who are 
not yet established, this creates large barriers to bringing a section 43(a) claim, 
which is unfortunate because up-and-coming artists have a special interest in 
protecting the integrity of their works and name in order to establish symbolic 

 

(2003),  may  have  eviscerated  at  least  some  attribution  claims.  See  infra  notes  174-177  and 
accompanying text. 

166.  MERRYMAN ET AL., supra note 11, at 438. 
167.  Interestingly,  here  we  see  a  section  43(a)  claim  being  brought  after  the  artist’s  death, 
whereas  a  VARA  claim  could  only  be  brought  while  an  artist  is  still  alive.  See  17  
U.S.C. § 106A (2006). 

168.  745 F. Supp. 130 (S.D.N.Y. 1990). 
169.  Id. at 142. 
170.  See RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF UNFAIR COMPETITION § 14 (1995). 

252 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

value early on.171 Further, the requirement that an artist acquire distinctiveness 
in his trade dress would demand that an artist paint in a consistent, repetitive 
style—while  many  of  the  most  famous  artists  today  work  in  largely 
heterogeneous styles across a wide variety of media.172 

The interest in trademark law as a potential remedy for “moral rights”-type 
violations  (misattribution,  modification,  etc.)  has  gained  more  ground  since 
the  2003  Supreme  Court  decision  Dastar  Corp.  v.  Twentieth  Century  Fox  Film 
Corp.,173 in which the defendant repackaged the plaintiff’s television series and 
sold it as its own. The plaintiff sued under the Lanham Act (since VARA only 
applies to fine artists), but the Court ruled that because the series’s copyright 
had  expired,  the  work  was  now  effectively  in  the  public  domain  and  anyone 
was free to use it as they pleased.174 The decision has been roundly criticized 
because  the  Court  conflated  copyright  and  trademark  rights  for  authors  by 
suggesting that if an author does not have a right to the former, he does not 
have  a  right  to  the  latter,  either.175  The  decision  is  interesting  in  relation  to 
VARA, which applies only to physical works of art, yet specifically disaggregates 
copyright and moral rights, ensuring the author some degree of control even if 
he  has  transferred  his  copyright  with  the  work.176  While  Dastar  does  not 
mention moral rights or VARA, it at least implies that we are unlikely to see an 
expansion  of  moral  rights-type  protections  for  works  outside  of  visual  art, 
specifically  because  the  Court  has  eviscerated  at  least  a  portion  of  possible 
section 43(a) claims for authors.177 

 

171.   See supra notes 81-110 and accompanying text. 
172.   See supra note 101 and accompanying text. 
173.   539 U.S. 23 (2003). 
174.   Id. at 33-34. 
175.   See  Ginsburg,  supra  note  54,  at  380  (“Because  there  is  no  general  copyright  protection  of 
authors’ names, authors had resorted to trademark law to fill the gap [with] a remedy for 
the  false  attribution  of  [an  author’s]  work  to  another  person  .  .  .  on  the  ground  that  the 
conduct constituted ‘reverse passing off.’ . . . But, in Dastar, the Supreme Court rejected the 
application  of  this  text.”);  Jane  C.  Ginsburg,  The  Right  To  Claim  Authorship  in  U.S. 
Copyright and Trademarks Law, 41 HOUS. L. REV. 263, 268 (2004). 

176.  17 U.S.C. § 106A(e)(2) (2006). 
177.   However, in other situations where an author is likely to prevail on his copyright claim, he 
could  have  an  additional  cause  of  action  under  section  43(a),  as  well.  Plaintiffs  used  this 
approach in Gilliam v. American Broadcasting Cos., 538 F.2d 14 (2d Cir. 1976), where the court 
applied the Lanham Act to a significant modification of a Monty Python work. 

 

253 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

B. Can Moral Rights Advance the Public Interest? 

The  economic 

lies 

incentive  behind  copyright 

in  the  belief  that 
“encouragement of individual effort by personal gain is the best way to advance 
public  welfare  through  the  talents  of  authors.”178  Thus,  it  is  at  least  arguable 
that  if  a  modification  of  copyright  does  not  advance  “the  Progress  of 
Science,”179  that  modification 
is  unconstitutional.180  Likewise,  VARA’s 
legislative  history  is  highly  concerned  with  elucidating  the  important  public 
benefits that will emerge from according moral rights to artists: 

Artists must sustain a belief in the importance of their work if they are 
to do their best. If there exists the real possibility that the fruits of this 
effort will be destroyed after a mere ten to twenty years the incentive to 
excel is  diminished and replaced with  a purely profit motivation. The 
Visual  Artists  Rights  Act  mitigates  against  this  and  protects  our 
historical legacy.181 

This  Note,  however,  has  argued  that  a  “pure  profit  motivation”—in  clever 
branding,  advertising,  and  general  celebrity-type  antics  to  which  the 
contemporary art world today is prone182—is all that’s left, and the moral rights 
regime  is  the  inadvertent,  inaptly  named  legal  system  that  protects  those 
economic, trademark-like interests. 

Yet perhaps what is most interesting about the comparisons between moral 
rights law and trademark law is that both can serve a distinctly public function: 
rather than incentivize creators, trademark law  means to protect  consumers, or 
the  buying  public,  by  ensuring  accurate  source  identification  and  reducing 
search  costs.  Further,  the  viewing  public  also  benefits  from  accurate  source 
identification, as they must read each work, intact and as the artist intended it, 
against the whole of an artist’s oeuvre. The benefit to the public, however, is 
necessarily  predicated  on  the  individual  viewer’s  encounter  with  the  work, 
rather  than  a  shared  sense  of  community  ethos.  This  Note  has  thrown  into 

 

178.   Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201, 219 (1954). 
179.  U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8, cl. 8. 
180.  See  Eldred  v.  Ashcroft,  537  U.S.  186,  211-12  (2003)  (noting  petitioners’  argument  that  the 
Copyright Term Extension Act fails to promote the “Progress of Science” because it does not 
incentivize the creation of new works (quoting U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8, cl. 8)). 
181.   H.R. REP. NO. 101-514, at 7 (1990), reprinted in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6915, 6916. 
182.  Jeff  Koons,  for  example,  made  advertising  his  mode  of  art  making  by  launching  an 
advertising campaign in different international art magazines, where he posed “in them as a 
slightly perverse-looking teacher.” GRAW, supra note 68, at 53. 

254 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

doubt  whether  we  can  expect  art  to  serve  a  broader  social  function  that  
consists  of  “common  reference  points  or  icons  .  .  .  widely  shared  in  social 
communication.”183  Whether  the  often  obscure  contemporary  art  objects  of 
today will resonate the way Picasso or Rembrandt paintings did in their day is 
a  topic  for  a  different  article.  I  only  mean  to  suggest  that  the  industrial 
processes through which the contingent art object is made rely on the artist to 
perform  quality  control  measures,  for  which  “signing  off”  on  the  finished 
product  is  key.  In  the  event  that  a  poor  fabrication  is  made  off  an  artist’s 
original  plans—as  was  the  case  with  the  reconstruction  of  Carl  Andre’s  1969 
piece Fall,184 in which the bend in the steel curved less dramatically than Andre 
had  intended—VARA  would  allow  the  artist  to  prevent  use  of  his  name  in 
connection with the work.185 

Lastly,  the  fact  that  trademark  law  has  also  been  acknowledged  to 
incentivize producers by facilitating investment in goodwill186 may serve a more 
traditionally  socially  beneficial  artistic  function  as  well.  Like  copyright  law, 
thinking  of  art  making  as  brand  making  may  encourage  artists  to  develop  a 
unique, path-making style and garner symbolic value early on in their careers, 
 

183.   Hansmann & Santilli, supra note 15, at 106. 
184.  See supra note 95 and accompanying text. 
185.   However, as Andre’s Fall was fabricated well before VARA’s enactment, the artist could do 
nothing to prevent its showing at the Ace Gallery in Los Angeles. His only recourse was to 
disavow connection of his name with the piece after the fact. “After finding out about the 
refabrication  from  a  review,  Andre  insisted  in  a  letter  to  Art  in  America  that  ‘No  such 
“refabrication” of [his] work has been authorized by [him] and any such “refabrication” is a 
gross falsification of [his] work.’” BUSKIRK, supra note 16, at 45. However, the damage had 
already been done. For visitors to the Ace Gallery, their encounter with the Andre piece had 
necessarily  been  what  I  might  venture  to  call  a  “false”  one—a  different  fabrication  of  the 
piece,  with  the  dramatic  curves  Andre  had  intended,  would  have  produced  the  desired 
engagement  with  the  object.  Though  a  slight  change  in  the  curvature  of  a  sculpture  may 
seem trivial to some, it is precisely minimalist art’s focus on the object as experience—the 
object’s ability to confront the viewer with its specific shape and materiality as the viewer 
moves around the piece—that constitutes its power. Michael Fried, in his famous article on 
minimalist sculpture, discusses this fact: 

[Minimalist] sensibility is theatrical because, to begin with, it is concerned with 
the  actual  circumstances  in  which  the  beholder  encounters  literalist  work  .  .  .  . 
[Minimalist  artist  Robert]  Morris  believes  that  this  awareness  is  heightened  by 
“the  strength  of  the  constant,  known  shape,  the  gestalt,”  against  which  the 
appearance  of  the  piece  from  different  points  of  view  is  constantly  being 
compared. 

MICHAEL FRIED, Art and Objecthood, in ART AND OBJECTHOOD: ESSAYS AND REVIEWS 148, 153 
(1998). 

186.  Stacey  L.  Dogan  &  Mark  A.  Lemley,  The  Merchandising  Right:  Fragile  Theory  or  Fait 

Accompli?, 54 EMORY L.J. 461, 466 (2005). 

 

255 

 
the yale law journal 

 

122:218 

  2012 

in  turn  propelling  forward  the  Progress  of  Science  via  stylistic  innovation.187 
Whether  meant  as  a  serious  offer  or  a  satirical  message,  Hirst’s  grotesque 
gesture of the $100 million skull has accurately captured “the essence of [our] 
culture and record[ed] it for future generations,”188 resulting in a new form of 
art for the contemporary era. As it turns out, “it is often through art that we are 
able to see truths, both beautiful and ugly.”189 

conclusion 

Part  of  the  reason  that  the  myth  of  van  Gogh’s  ear  and  of  the  romantic 
modernist  painter  have  persisted  through  the  ages  is  because  it  is  a  story  we 
want to believe in, and, subsequently, vicariously experience. Even as recently 
as the 1950s, Jackson Pollock, that art-world superstar, was still the lone wolf, 
chugging whiskey and splashing paint wildly about on his floor-laid canvases. 
We  see  brazen  action  painting  like  Pollock’s  as  risk-taking:  “[W]e  rely  on 
[artists]  to  make  up  for  our  own  timidity,  on  their  courage  to  dignify  our 
caution.”190 And while we  may “all make our wagers,” the  “artist does  more. 
He bets his life.”191 

And  so  it  is.  If  the  stakes  of  the  game  have  changed  since  high 
modernism—if it is now “cool” to be economically successful192—so, too, have 
the  times.  Warhol  may  have  been  the  first  artist  to  successfully  capitalize  on 
and  foreshadow  the  power  of  modern  media  and  consumer  culture  for  the 
artist-as-businessman model,193 but he is just one of many postmodern artists 
who  now  look  to  the  conditions  of  the  market  as  talisman  and  guide,  rather 
than  creating  artworks  from  the  spontaneous,  inspired  depths  of  their  own 
tortured souls.194 In some ways, this may make sense. Isn’t art on some level 
 

187.   See supra Section II.B. 
188.  H.R. REP. NO. 101-514, at 7 (1990), reprinted in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6915, 6917 (quoting 135 

CONG. REC. S6811-13 (daily ed. June 16. 1989) (statement of Rep. Markey)). 

189.  Id. 
190.  Gopnik, supra note 6. 
191.   Id. 
192.  See GRAW, supra note 68, at 95-100. 
193.  It is well known, of course, that Warhol was a commercial illustrator before he launched his 

art career. See 2 FOSTER ET AL., supra note 40, at 486. 

194.  This  statement,  however,  calls  for  a  caveat.  I  don’t  mean  to  imply  that  all  contemporary 
artists are modeling themselves in the Hirst, Koons, or Prince fashion. But those who do 
not—the  so-called  “artist’s  artists,”  admired  for  their  formal  rigor,  their  romantic  beliefs, 
and, best of all, their death in near-obscurity—will benefit little, if at all, from moral rights, 
since the right only persists for the duration of an artist’s life. “Artist’s artists,” like the post-

256 
 

 
the artist as brand 

 

always reflective of the times we live in? If this is the case, I do not know how 
the dialogue surrounding moral rights may be justified in the future. In fact, 
the pendulum may just swing back again at some later date, in which art once 
again  becomes  lofty,  and  moral  rights  thus  become  a  special  subset  of  rights 
somehow justifiable of their own accord. For now, I propose that moral rights 
are  probably  no  more  or  less  than  trademark  law—that  great  engine  of 
consumerism, beating ceaselessly on in the name of commerce, capitalism, and 
yes, even culture. 

 
 
 
 

 

 

conceptualist sculptor Paul Thek, will often be “rediscovered” and launched into art world 
favor  posthumously,  when  galleries  and  museums  scramble  to  hold  “long-overdue” 
retrospectives of their work. See Paul Thek: Diver, a Retrospective, WHITNEY MUSEUM OF AM. 
ART, http://whitney.org/Exhibitions/PaulThek (last visited Sept. 3, 2012) (noting that the 
Whitney’s  2010-11  show  is  Thek’s  first  retrospective  in  the  United  States);  see  also  Peter 
Schjeldahl, Out-There Man, NEW YORKER, Nov. 1, 2010, at 116 (“He died, of AIDS, in 1988, 
at  the  age  of  fifty-four;  he  is  too  little  known,  and  his  rediscovery  promises  to  have  a 
galvanizing effect on young artists.”). 

257 

