 

 

 

UNIVERSAL CITY STUDIOS, INC. v. ERIC CORLEY 

273 F.3d 429 (2d Cir. 2001) 

JON O. NEWMAN, Circuit Judge. 
When the Framers of the First Amendment prohibited Congress from making any law "abridg-
ing the freedom of speech," they were not thinking about computers, computer programs, or the In-
ternet. But neither were they thinking about radio, television, or movies. Just as the inventions at the 
beginning and middle of the 20th century presented new First Amendment issues, so does the cyber 
revolution at the end of that century. This appeal raises significant First Amendment issues concern-
ing one aspect of computer technology--encryption to protect materials in digital form from unau-
thorized  access.  The  appeal  challenges  the  constitutionality  of  the  Digital  Millennium  Copyright 
Act ("DMCA"), 17 U.S.C. §1201 et seq., and the validity of an injunction entered to enforce the 
DMCA. 

Defendant-Appellant  Eric  C.  Corley  and  his  company,  2600  Enterprises,  Inc.,  (collectively 
"Corley,"  "the  Defendants,"  or  "the  Appellants")  appeal  from  the  amended  final  judgment  of  the 
United  States  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York  (Lewis  A.  Kaplan,  District 
Judge), entered August 23, 2000, enjoining them from various actions concerning a decryption pro-
gram  known  as  "DeCSS."    Universal  City  Studios,  Inc.  v.  Reimerdes,  111  F.  Supp.  2d  346 
(S.D.N.Y. 2000) ("Universal II"). The injunction primarily bars the Appellants from posting DeCSS 
on their web site and from knowingly linking [*435] their web site to any other web site on which 
DeCSS is posted.  We affirm. 

Introduction 

Understanding the pending appeal and the issues it raises requires some familiarity with techni-
cal aspects of computers and computer software, especially software called "digital versatile disks" 
or "DVDs," which are optical media storage devices currently designed to contain movies.  Those 
lacking such familiarity will be greatly aided by reading Judge Kaplan's extremely lucid opinion, 
Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp. 2d 294 (S.D.N.Y. 2000) ("Universal I"), 
beginning with his helpful section "The Vocabulary of this Case." 

This appeal concerns the anti-trafficking provisions of the DMCA, which Congress enacted in 
1998 to strengthen copyright protection in the digital age. Fearful that the ease with which pirates 
could copy and distribute a copyrightable work in digital form was overwhelming the capacity of 
conventional copyright enforcement to find and enjoin unlawfully copied material, Congress sought 
to combat copyright piracy in its earlier stages, before the work was even copied. The DMCA there-
fore backed with legal sanctions the efforts of copyright owners to protect their works from piracy 
behind digital walls such as encryption codes or password protections. In so doing, Congress tar-
geted not only those pirates who would circumvent these digital walls (the "anti-circumvention pro-
visions," contained in 17 U.S.C. §1201 (a)(1)), but also anyone who would traffic in a technology 
primarily designed to circumvent a digital wall (the "anti-trafficking provisions," contained in 17 
U.S.C. §1201 (a)(2), (b)(1)). 

Corley publishes a print magazine and maintains an affiliated web site geared towards "hack-
ers," a digital-era term often applied to those interested in techniques for circumventing protections 
of  computers  and  computer  data  from  unauthorized  access.  The  so-called  hacker  community  in-

 

1 

 

cludes serious computer-science scholars conducting research on protection techniques, computer 
buffs intrigued by the challenge of trying to circumvent access-limiting devices or perhaps hoping 
to promote security by exposing flaws in protection techniques, mischief-makers interested in dis-
rupting computer operations, and thieves, including copyright infringers who want to acquire copy-
righted material (for personal use or resale) without paying for it. 

In November 1999, Corley posted a copy of the decryption computer program "DeCSS" on his 
web site, http://www.2600.com.1  DeCSS is designed to circumvent "CSS," the encryption technol-
ogy  [*436]  that  motion  picture  studios  place  on  DVDs  to  prevent  the  unauthorized  viewing  and 
copying  of  motion  pictures.  Corley  also  posted  on  his  web  site  links  to  other  web  sites  where 
DeCSS could be found. 

Plaintiffs-Appellees are eight motion picture studios that brought an action in the Southern Dis-
trict of New York seeking injunctive relief against Corley under the DMCA. Following a full non-
jury trial, the District Court entered a permanent injunction barring Corley from posting DeCSS on 
his web site or from knowingly linking via a hyperlink to any other web site containing DeCSS.  
The District Court rejected Corley's constitutional attacks on the statute and the injunction.  

Corley renews his constitutional challenges on appeal. Specifically, he argues primarily that: (1) 
the DMCA oversteps limits in the Copyright Clause on the duration of copyright protection; (2) the 
DMCA as applied to his dissemination of DeCSS violates the First Amendment because computer 
code is "speech" entitled to full First Amendment protection and the DMCA fails to survive the ex-
acting  scrutiny  accorded  statutes  that  regulate  "speech";  and  (3)  the  DMCA  violates  the  First 
Amendment and the Copyright Clause by unduly obstructing the "fair use" of copyrighted materials. 
Corley also argues that the statute is susceptible to, and should therefore be given, a narrow inter-
pretation that avoids alleged constitutional objections. 

 

Background 

For decades, motion picture studios have made movies available for viewing at home in what is 
called "analog" format. Movies in this format are placed on videotapes, which can be played on a 
video cassette recorder ("VCR"). In the early 1990s, the studios began to consider the possibility of 
distributing movies in digital form as well. Movies in digital form are placed on disks, known as 
DVDs,  which  can  be  played  on  a  DVD  player  (either  a  stand-alone  device  or  a  component  of  a 
computer). DVDs offer advantages over analog tapes, such as improved visual and audio quality, 
larger data capacity, and greater durability. However, the improved quality of a movie in a digital 
format brings with it the risk that a virtually perfect copy, i.e., one that will not lose perceptible 
quality in the copying process, can be readily made at the click of a computer control and instantly 
distributed to countless recipients throughout the world over the Internet. This case arises out of the 
movie  industry's  efforts  to  respond  to  this  risk  by  invoking  the  anti-trafficking  provisions  of  the 
DMCA. 
                          
1 "2600" has special significance to the hacker community. It is the hertz frequency ("a unit of frequency of a periodic 
process  equal  to  one  cycle  per  second,"  Webster's  Third  New  International  Dictionary  1061  (1993))  of  a  signal  that 
some hackers formerly used to explore the entire telephone system from "operator mode," which was triggered by the 
transmission of a 2600 hertz tone across a telephone line, or to place telephone calls without incurring long-distance toll 
charges. One such user reportedly discovered that the sound of a toy whistle from a box of Cap'n Crunch cereal matched 
the telephone company's 2600 hertz tone perfectly.  

 

2 

 

I. CSS 

The  movie  studios  were  reluctant  to  release  movies  in  digital  form  until  they were  confident 
they had in place adequate safeguards against piracy of their copyrighted movies. The studios took 
several steps to minimize the piracy threat. First, they settled on the DVD as the standard digital 
medium for home distribution of movies. The studios then sought an encryption scheme to protect 
movies on DVDs. They enlisted the help of members of the consumer electronics and computer in-
dustries, who in mid-1996 developed the Content Scramble System ("CSS"). CSS is an encryption 
scheme that employs an algorithm configured by a set of "keys" to encrypt a DVD's contents. The 
algorithm  is  a  type  of  mathematical  formula  for  transforming  the  contents  of  the  movie  file  into 
gibberish; the "keys" are in actuality strings of 0's and 1's that serve as values for the mathematical 
formula. Decryption in the case of CSS requires a set of "player [*437] keys" contained in compli-
ant DVD players, as well as an understanding of the CSS encryption algorithm. Without the player 
keys and the algorithm, a DVD player cannot access the contents of a DVD. With the player keys 
and the algorithm, a DVD player can display the movie on a television or a computer screen, but 
does not give a viewer the ability to use the copy function of the computer to copy the movie or to 
manipulate the digital content of the DVD. 

The studios developed a licensing scheme for distributing the technology to manufacturers of 
DVD players. Player keys and other information necessary to the CSS scheme were given to manu-
facturers  of  DVD  players  for  an  administrative  fee.  In  exchange  for  the  licenses,  manufacturers 
were obliged to keep the player keys confidential. Manufacturers were also required in the licensing 
agreement to prevent the transmission of "CSS data" (a term undefined in the licensing agreement) 
from a DVD drive to any "internal recording device," including, presumably, a computer hard drive. 
With encryption technology and licensing agreements in hand, the studios began releasing mov-
ies on DVDs in 1997, and DVDs quickly gained in popularity, becoming a significant source of 
studio revenue.2  In 1998, the studios secured added protection against DVD piracy when Congress 
passed the DMCA, which prohibits the development or use of technology designed to circumvent a 
technological protection measure, such as CSS. The pertinent provisions of the DMCA are exam-
ined in greater detail below. 
 

II. DeCSS 

In September 1999, Jon Johansen, a Norwegian teenager, collaborating with two unidentified 
individuals he met on the Internet, reverse-engineered a licensed DVD player designed to operate 
on the Microsoft operating system, and culled from it the player keys and other information neces-
sary to decrypt CSS. The record suggests that Johansen was trying to develop a DVD player oper-
able on Linux, an alternative operating system that did not support any licensed DVD players at that 
time. In order to accomplish this task, Johansen wrote a decryption program executable on Micro-
soft's operating system.  That program was called, appropriately enough, "DeCSS." 
 

                          
2 By the end of 1997, most if not all DVDs that were released were encrypted with CSS. Moreover, DVD players were 
projected to be in ten percent of United States homes by the end of 2000.  In fact, as of 2000, about thirty-five percent of 
one studio's worldwide revenues from movie distribution was attributable to DVD sales and rentals. 
 

 

3 

 

If a user runs the DeCSS program (for example, by clicking on the DeCSS icon on a Microsoft 
operating  system  platform)  with  a  DVD  in  the  computer's  disk  drive,  DeCSS  will  decrypt  the 
DVD's CSS protection, allowing the user to copy the DVD's files and place the copy on the user's 
hard  drive.  The  result  is  a  very  large  computer  file  that  can  be  played  on  a  non-CSS-compliant 
player and copied, manipulated, and transferred just like any [*438] other computer file.3  DeCSS 
comes  complete  with  a  fairly  user-friendly  interface  that  helps  the  user  select  from  among  the 
DVD's files and assign the decrypted file a location on the user's hard drive. The quality of the re-
sulting decrypted movie is "virtually identical" to that of the encrypted movie on the DVD.  And the 
file produced by DeCSS, while large, can be compressed to a manageable size by a compression 
software  called  "DivX,"  available  at  no  cost  on  the  Internet.  This  compressed  file  can  be  copied 
onto a DVD, or transferred over the Internet (with some patience).4 

Johansen posted the executable object code, but not the source code, for DeCSS on his web site. 
The distinction between source code and object code is relevant to this case, so a brief explanation 
is warranted. A computer responds to electrical charges, the presence or absence of which [*439] is 
represented by strings of 1's and 0's. Strictly speaking, "object code" consists of those 1's and 0's. 
While some people can read and program in object code, "it would be inconvenient, inefficient and, 
for most people, probably impossible to do so." Computer languages have been written to facilitate 
program writing and reading. A program in such a computer language -- BASIC, C, and Java are 
examples -- is said to be written in "source code." Source code has the benefit of being much easier 
to read (by people) than object code, but as a general matter, it must be translated back to object 
                          
3 An item of some controversy, both in this litigation and elsewhere, is the extent to which CSS-encrypted DVDs can 
be copied even without DeCSS. The record leaves largely unclear how CSS protects against the copying of a DVD, as 
contrasted with the playing of a DVD on an unlicensed player. The Defendants' experts insisted that there is nothing 
about the way CSS operates that prevents the copying of a DVD.  Some of the Plaintiffs' experts countered simply that 
"copying to a hard drive is something that compliant DVD players are not allowed to do," without explaining why.  An-
other expert indicated that while a DVD movie can be copied to a computer's hard drive in encrypted form, the movie 
cannot be played without a DVD actually present in the DVD drive. This expert did not identify the mechanism that 
prevents someone from copying encrypted DVDs to a hard drive in the absence of a DVD in the disk drive. 
However, none of this detracts from these undisputed findings: some feature of either CSS itself, or another (unidenti-
fied)  safeguard  implemented  by  DVD  manufacturers  pursuant  to  their  obligations  under  the  CSS  licensing  scheme, 
makes it difficult to copy a CSS-encrypted DVD to a hard drive and then compress that DVD to the point where trans-
mission over the Internet is practical. Conversely, a DVD movie file without CSS encryption is easily copied, manipu-
lated, and transferred.  In other words, it might very well be that copying is not blocked by CSS itself, but by some other 
protection implemented by the DVD player manufacturers. Nonetheless, in decrypting CSS, the DeCSS program (per-
haps incidentally) sidesteps whatever it is that blocks copying of the files. 
While there may be alternative means of extracting a non-encrypted, copyable movie from a DVD -- for example, by 
copying the movie along with its encryption "bit-by-bit," or "ripping" a DVD by siphoning movie file data after CSS 
has already been decrypted by a licensed player -- DeCSS is the superior means of acquiring easily copyable movies, 
and in fact, is recommended by a DVD compression web site as the preferred tool for obtaining a decrypted DVD suit-
able for compression and transmission over the Internet. We acknowledge the complexity and the rapidly changing na-
ture of the technology involved in this case, but it is clear that the Defendants have presented no evidence to refute any 
of these carefully considered findings by the District Court. 
4  The District Court determined that even at high speeds, typical of university networks, transmission times ranged 
from three minutes to six hours. The Court noted, however, that "the availability of high speed network connections in 
many businesses and institutions, and their growing availability in homes, make Internet and other network traffic in 
pirated copies a growing threat." 
 

 

4 

 

code  before  it  can  be  read  by  a  computer.  This  task  is  usually  performed  by  a  program  called  a 
compiler.  Since computer languages range in complexity, object code can be placed on one end of 
a spectrum, and different kinds of source code can be arrayed across the spectrum according to the 
ease with which they are read and understood by humans. Within months of its appearance in ex-
ecutable form on Johansen's web site, DeCSS was widely available on the Internet, in both object 
code and various forms of source code.  

In  November  1999,  Corley  wrote  and  placed  on  his  web  site,  2600.com,  an  article  about  the 
DeCSS phenomenon. His web site is an auxiliary to the print magazine, 2600: The Hacker Quar-
terly, which Corley has been publishing since 1984.5  As the name suggests, the magazine is de-
signed for "hackers," as is the web site. While the magazine and the web site cover some issues of 
general interest to computer users -- such as threats to online privacy -- the focus of the publications 
is on the vulnerability of computer security systems, and more specifically, how to exploit that vul-
nerability in order to circumvent the security systems. Representative articles explain how to steal 
an Internet domain name and how to break into the computer systems at Federal Express. 

Corley's article about DeCSS detailed how CSS was cracked, and described the movie industry's 
efforts to shut down web sites posting DeCSS. It also explained that DeCSS could be used to copy 
DVDs.  At  the  end  of  the  article,  the  Defendants  posted  copies  of  the  object  and  source  code  of 
DeCSS. In Corley's words, he added the code to the story because "in a journalistic world, . . . you 
have to show your evidence . . . and particularly in the magazine that I work for, people want to see 
specifically what it is that we are referring to," including "what evidence . . . we have" that there is 
in fact technology that circumvents CSS.  Writing about DeCSS without including the DeCSS code 
would have been, to Corley, "analogous to printing a story about a picture and not printing the pic-
ture." Corley also added to the article links that he explained would take the reader to other web 
sites where DeCSS could be found.  

2600.com  was  only  one  of  hundreds  of  web  sites  that  began  posting  DeCSS  near  the  end  of 
1999. The movie industry tried to stem the tide by sending cease-and-desist letters to many of these 
sites.  These  efforts  met  with  only  partial  success;  a  number  of  sites  refused  to  remove  [*440] 
DeCSS. In January 2000, the studios filed this lawsuit.  
 

III. The DMCA 

The  DMCA  was  enacted  in  1998  to  implement  the  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization 
Copyright Treaty ("WIPO Treaty"), which requires contracting parties to "provide adequate legal 
protection and effective legal remedies against the circumvention of effective technological meas-
ures that are used by authors in connection with the exercise of their rights under this Treaty or the 
Berne Convention and that restrict acts, in respect of their works, which are not authorized by the 
authors concerned or permitted by law." Even before the treaty, Congress had been devoting atten-
tion to the problems faced by copyright enforcement in the digital age. Hearings on the topic have 
spanned several years. This legislative effort resulted in the DMCA. 

The  Act  contains  three  provisions  targeted  at  the  circumvention  of  technological  protections. 
The first is subsection 1201(a)(1)(A), the anti-circumvention provision.  This provision prohibits a 
                          
5 Defendant 2600 Enterprises, Inc., is the company Corley incorporated to run the magazine, maintain the web site, and 
manage related endeavors like merchandising. 
 

 

5 

 

person from "circumventing a technological measure that effectively controls access to a work pro-
tected under [Title 17, governing copyright]." The Librarian of Congress is required to promulgate 
regulations every three years exempting from this subsection individuals who would otherwise be 
"adversely affected" in "their ability to make noninfringing uses." 17 U.S.C. §1201 (a)(1)(B)-(E). 

The second and third provisions are subsections 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b)(1), the "anti-trafficking 

provisions." Subsection 1201(a)(2), the provision at issue in this case, provides:  

   No person shall manufacture, import, offer to the public, provide, or otherwise traffic 
in any technology, product, service, device, component, or part thereof, that-- 

(A) is primarily designed or produced for the purpose of circumventing a techno-

logical measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under this title; 

(B) has only limited commercially significant purpose or use other than to circum-
vent a technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under 
this title; or 

(C) is marketed by that person or another acting in concert with that person with 
that person's knowledge for use in circumventing a technological measure [*441] that 
effectively controls access to a work protected under this title. 

 To "circumvent a technological measure" is defined, in pertinent part, as "to descramble a scram-
bled work . . . or otherwise to . . . bypass . . . a technological measure, without the authority of the 
copyright owner." Id. §1201(a)(3)(A). 

Subsection  1201(b)(1)  is  similar  to  subsection  1201(a)(2),  except  that  subsection  1201(a)(2) 
covers those who traffic in technology that can circumvent "a technological measure that effectively 
controls access to a work protected under" Title 17, whereas subsection 1201(b)(1) covers those 
who traffic in technology that can circumvent "protection afforded by a technological measure that 
effectively protects a right of a copyright owner under" Title 17.  In other words, although both sub-
sections prohibit trafficking in a circumvention technology, the focus of subsection 1201(a)(2) is 
circumvention of technologies designed to prevent access to a work, and the focus of subsection 
1201(b)(1) is circumvention of technologies designed to permit access to a work but prevent copy-
ing of the work or some other act that infringes a copyright. Subsection 1201(a)(1) differs from both 
of these anti-trafficking subsections in that it targets the use of a circumvention technology, not the 
trafficking in such a technology. 

The DMCA contains exceptions for schools and libraries that want to use circumvention tech-
nologies to determine whether to purchase a copyrighted product, 17 U.S.C. §1201 (d); individuals 
using  circumvention  technology  "for  the  sole  purpose"  of  trying  to  achieve  "interoperability"  of 
computer programs through reverse-engineering, id. §1201(f); encryption research aimed at identi-
fying flaws in encryption technology, if the research is conducted to advance the state of knowledge 
in the field, id. §1201(g); and several other exceptions not relevant here. 

The DMCA creates civil remedies, id. §1203, and criminal sanctions, id. §1204. It specifically 
authorizes a court to "grant temporary and permanent injunctions on such terms as it deems reason-
able to prevent or restrain a violation." Id. §1203(b)(1). 
 

 

6 

 

 

IV. Procedural History 

Invoking subsection 1203(b)(1), the Plaintiffs sought an injunction against the Defendants, al-
leging  that  the  Defendants  violated  the  anti-trafficking  provisions  of  the  statute.  On  January  20, 
2000, after a hearing, the District Court issued a preliminary injunction barring the Defendants from 
posting DeCSS.   

The Defendants complied with the preliminary injunction, but continued to post links to other 
web sites carrying DeCSS, an action they termed "electronic civil disobedience." Under the heading 
"Stop the MPAA [(Motion Picture Association of America)]," Corley urged other web sites to post 
DeCSS lest "we . . . be forced into submission."  

The  Plaintiffs  then  sought  a  permanent  injunction  barring  the  Defendants  from  both  posting 
DeCSS and linking to sites containing DeCSS. After a trial on the merits, the Court issued a com-
prehensive opinion, Universal I, and granted a permanent injunction, Universal II. 

The Court explained that the Defendants' posting of DeCSS on their web site clearly falls within 
section 1201(a)(2)(A) of the DMCA, rejecting as spurious their claim that CSS is not a technologi-
cal measure that "effectively controls access to a [*442] work" because it was so easily penetrated 
by Johansen, and as irrelevant their contention that DeCSS was designed to create a Linux-platform 
DVD  player.  The  Court  also  held  that  the  Defendants  cannot  avail  themselves  of  any  of  the 
DMCA's  exceptions,  and  that  the  alleged  importance  of  DeCSS  to  certain  fair  uses  of  encrypted 
copyrighted material was immaterial to their statutory liability. The Court went on to hold that when 
the  Defendants  "proclaimed  on  their  own  site  that  DeCSS  could  be  had  by  clicking  on  the 
hyperlinks" on their site, they were trafficking in DeCSS, and therefore liable for their linking as 
well as their posting.  

Turning to the Defendants' numerous constitutional arguments, the Court first held that com-
puter  code  like  DeCSS  is  "speech"  that  is  "protected"  (in  the  sense  of  "covered")  by  the  First 
Amendment, but that because the DMCA is targeting the "functional" aspect of that speech, it is 
"content  neutral,"  and  the  intermediate  scrutiny  of  United  States  v.  O'Brien,  391  U.S.  367,  377 
(1968), applies. The Court concluded that the DMCA survives this scrutiny, and also rejected prior 
restraint, overbreadth, and vagueness challenges.  

The Court upheld the constitutionality of the DMCA's application to linking on similar grounds: 
linking, the Court concluded, is "speech," but the DMCA is content-neutral, targeting only the func-
tional  components  of  that  speech.  Therefore,  its  application  to  linking  is  also  evaluated  under 
O'Brien, and, thus evaluated, survives intermediate scrutiny. However, the Court concluded that a 
blanket proscription on linking would create a risk of chilling legitimate linking on the web. The 
Court therefore crafted a restrictive test for linking liability (discussed below) that it believed suffi-
ciently mitigated that risk. The Court then found its test satisfied in this case.   

Finally, the Court concluded that an injunction was highly appropriate in this case. The Court 
observed that DeCSS was harming the Plaintiffs, not only because they were now exposed to the 
possibility of piracy and therefore were obliged to develop costly new safeguards for DVDs, but 
also because, even if there was only indirect evidence that DeCSS availability actually facilitated 
DVD piracy,  the threat of piracy was very real, particularly as Internet transmission speeds con-
tinue to increase.  Acknowledging that DeCSS was (and still is) widely available on the Internet, the 
Court expressed confidence in 

 

7 

 

  

   the likelihood . . . that this decision will serve notice on others that "the strong right 
arm of equity" may be brought to bear against them absent a change in their conduct 
and thus contribute to a climate of appropriate respect for intellectual property rights in 
an age in which the excitement of ready access to [*443] untold quantities of informa-
tion has blurred in some minds the fact that taking what is not yours and not freely of-
fered to you is stealing. 

 
  
The  Court's  injunction  barred  the  Defendants  from:  "posting  on  any  Internet  web  site" 
DeCSS; "in any other way . . . offering to the public, providing, or otherwise trafficking in DeCSS"; 
violating the anti-trafficking provisions of the DMCA in any other manner, and finally "knowingly 
linking any Internet web site operated by them to any other web site containing DeCSS, or know-
ingly maintaining any such link, for the purpose of disseminating DeCSS."  

The Appellants have appealed from the permanent injunction. The United States has intervened 
in  support  of  the  constitutionality  of  the  DMCA.  We  have  also  had  the  benefit  of  a  number  of 
amicus curiae briefs, supporting and opposing the District Court's judgment. After oral argument, 
we invited the parties to submit responses to a series of specific questions, and we have received 
helpful responses. 

 

Discussion 

I. Narrow Construction to Avoid Constitutional Doubt 

The Appellants first argue that, because their constitutional arguments are at least substantial, 
we should interpret the statute narrowly so as to avoid constitutional problems. They identify three 
different  instances  of  alleged  ambiguity  in  the  statute  that  they  claim  provide  an  opportunity  for 
such a narrow interpretation. 

First, they contend that subsection 1201(c)(1), which provides that "nothing in this section shall 
affect rights, remedies, limitations or defenses to copyright infringement, including fair use, under 
this title," can be read to allow the circumvention of encryption technology protecting copyrighted 
material when the material will be put to "fair uses" exempt from copyright liability.  We disagree 
that subsection 1201(c)(1) permits such a reading. Instead, it simply clarifies that the DMCA targets 
the circumvention of digital walls guarding copyrighted material (and trafficking in circumvention 
tools), but does not concern itself with the use of those materials after circumvention has occurred. 
Subsection 1201(c)(1) ensures that the DMCA is not read to prohibit the "fair use" of information 
just because that information was obtained in a manner made illegal by the DMCA. The Appellants' 
much more expansive interpretation of subsection 1201(c)(1) is not only outside the range of plau-
sible readings of the provision, but is also clearly refuted by the statute's legislative history.6 
                          
6 The legislative history of the enacted bill makes quite clear that Congress intended to adopt a "balanced" approach to 
accommodating both piracy and fair use concerns, eschewing the quick fix of simply exempting from the statute all 
circumventions for fair use. It sought to achieve this goal principally through the use of what it called a "fail-safe" pro-
vision in the statute, authorizing the Librarian of Congress to exempt certain users from the anti-circumvention provi-
sion when it becomes evident that in practice, the statute is adversely affecting certain kinds of fair use.  
Congress also sought to implement a balanced approach through statutory provisions that leave limited areas of breath-
ing space for fair use. A good example is subsection 1201(d), which allows a library or educational institution to cir-

 

8 

 

 

 Second,  the  Appellants  urge  a  narrow  construction  of  the  DMCA  because  of  subsection 
1201(c)(4), which provides that "nothing in this section shall enlarge or diminish any rights of free 
speech  or  the  press  for  activities  using  consumer  electronics,  telecommunications,  or  computing 
products." This language is clearly precatory: Congress could not "diminish" constitutional rights of 
free speech even if it wished to, and the fact that Congress also expressed a reluctance to "enlarge" 
those rights cuts against the Appellants' effort to infer a narrowing construction of the Act from this 
provision. 

Third, the Appellants argue that an individual who buys a DVD has the "authority of the copy-
right owner" to view the DVD, and therefore is exempted from the DMCA pursuant to subsection 
1201(a)(3)(A) when the buyer circumvents an encryption technology in order to view the DVD on a 
competing platform (such as Linux). The basic flaw in this argument is that it misreads subsection 
1201(a)(3)(A). That provision exempts from liability those who would "decrypt" an encrypted DVD 
with the authority of a copyright owner, not those who would "view" a DVD with the authority of a 
copyright owner.  In any event, the Defendants offered no evidence that the Plaintiffs have either 
explicitly or implicitly authorized DVD buyers to circumvent encryption technology to support use 
on multiple platforms. 

We conclude that the anti-trafficking and anti-circumvention provisions of the DMCA are not 
susceptible to the narrow interpretations urged by the Appellants. We therefore proceed to consider 
the Appellants' constitutional claims. 
 

II. Constitutional Challenge Based on the Copyright Clause 

In a footnote to their brief, the Appellants appear to contend that the DMCA, as construed by the 
District Court, exceeds the constitutional authority [*445] of Congress to grant authors copyrights 
for a "limited time," U.S. Const. art. I, §8, cl. 8, because it "empowers copyright owners to effec-
tively secure perpetual protection by mixing public domain works with copyrighted materials, then 
locking both up with technological protection measures."  This argument is elaborated in the amici 
curiae brief filed by Prof. Julie E. Cohen on behalf of herself and 45 other intellectual property law 
professors.  For two reasons, the argument provides no basis for disturbing the judgment of the Dis-
trict Court. 

First, we have repeatedly ruled that arguments presented to us only in a footnote are not entitled 
to appellate consideration.  Although an amicus brief can be helpful in elaborating issues properly 
presented by the parties, it is normally not a method for injecting new issues into an appeal, at least 
in cases where the parties are competently represented by counsel.  

Second, to whatever extent the argument might have merit at some future time in a case with a 
properly developed record, the argument is entirely premature and speculative at this time on this 
record. There is not even a claim, much less evidence, that any Plaintiff has sought to prevent copy-
ing  of  public  domain  works,  or  that  the  injunction  prevents  the  Defendants  from  copying  such 

                                                                                    
cumvent a digital wall in order to determine whether it wishes legitimately to obtain the material behind the wall. It 
would be strange for Congress to open small, carefully limited windows for circumvention to permit fair use in subsec-
tion 1201(d) if it then meant to exempt in subsection 1201(c)(1) any circumvention necessary for fair use. 
 

 

9 

 

works. As Judge Kaplan noted, the possibility that encryption would preclude access to public do-
main works "does not yet appear to be a problem, although it may emerge as one in the future."  
  

III. Constitutional Challenges Based on the First Amendment 

A. Applicable Principles  

Last year, in one of our Court's first forays into First Amendment law in the digital age, we took 
an "evolutionary" approach to the task of tailoring familiar constitutional rules to novel technologi-
cal circumstances, favoring "narrow" holdings that would permit the law to mature on a "case-by-
case" basis. See Name.Space, Inc. v. Network Solutions, Inc., 202 F.3d 573, 584 n.11 (2d Cir. 2000). 
In that spirit, we proceed, with appropriate caution, to consider the Appellants' First Amendment 
challenges by analyzing a series of preliminary issues the resolution of which provides a basis for 
adjudicating the specific objections to the DMCA and its application to DeCSS. These issues, which 
we consider only to the extent necessary to resolve the pending appeal, are whether computer code 
is  speech,  whether  computer  programs  are  speech,  the  scope  of  First  Amendment  protection  for 
computer code, and the scope of First Amendment protection for decryption code. Based on our 
analysis of these issues, we then consider the Appellants' challenge to the injunction's provisions 
concerning posting and linking. 

1. Code as Speech 
Communication  does  not  lose  constitutional  protection  as  "speech"  simply  because  it  is  ex-
pressed in the language of computer code. Mathematical formulae and musical scores are written in 
"code," i.e., symbolic notations not comprehensible to the uninitiated, and yet both are covered by 
the First Amendment. If someone [*446] chose to write a novel entirely in computer object code by 
using strings of 1's and 0's for each letter of each word, the resulting work would be no different for 
constitutional purposes than if it had been written in English. The "object code" version would be 
incomprehensible  to  readers  outside  the  programming  community  (and  tedious  to  read  even  for 
most within the community), but it would be no more incomprehensible than a work written in San-
skrit  for  those  unversed  in  that  language.  The  undisputed  evidence  reveals  that  even  pure  object 
code can be, and often is, read and understood by experienced programmers. And source code (in 
any of its various levels of complexity) can be read by many more.  Ultimately, however, the ease 
with which a work is comprehended is irrelevant to the constitutional inquiry. If computer code is 
distinguishable from conventional speech for First Amendment purposes, it is not because it is writ-
ten in an obscure language. 

2. Computer Programs as Speech 
Of course, computer code is not likely to be the language in which a work of literature is writ-
ten. Instead, it is primarily the language for programs executable by a computer. These programs 
are essentially instructions to a computer. In general, programs may give instructions either to per-
form a task or series of tasks when initiated by a single (or double) click of a mouse or, once a pro-
gram is operational ("launched"), to manipulate data that the user enters into the computer.  Whether 
computer  code  that  gives  a  computer  instructions  is  "speech"  within  the  meaning  of  the  First 
Amendment requires consideration of the scope of the Constitution's protection of speech. 

The First Amendment provides that "Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of 
speech . . . ." U.S. Const. amend. I. "Speech" is an elusive term, and judges and scholars have de-

 

10 

 

bated  its  bounds  for  two  centuries.  Some  would  confine  First  Amendment  protection  to  political 
speech.  Others would extend it further to artistic expression.  

Whatever might be the merits of these and other approaches, the law has not been so limited. 
Even dry information, devoid of advocacy, political relevance, or artistic expression, has been ac-
corded First Amendment protection.  

Thus, for example, courts have subjected to First Amendment scrutiny restrictions on the dis-
semination of technical scientific information, and scientific research, and attempts to regulate the 
publication of instructions. 

Computer programs are not exempted from the category of First Amendment speech simply be-
cause their instructions require use of a computer. A recipe is no less "speech" because it calls for 
the use of an oven, and a musical score is no less "speech" because it specifies performance on an 
electric guitar. Arguably distinguishing computer programs from conventional language instructions 
is the fact that programs are executable on a computer.   But the fact that a program has the capacity 
to direct the functioning of a computer does not mean that it lacks the additional capacity to convey 
information, and it is the conveying of information that renders instructions "speech" for purposes 
of the First Amendment.  The information [*448] conveyed by most "instructions" is how to per-
form a task. 

Instructions such as computer code, which are intended to be executable by a computer, will of-
ten convey information capable of comprehension and assessment by a human being.  A program-
mer reading a program learns information about instructing a computer, and might use this informa-
tion to improve personal programming skills and perhaps the craft of programming. Moreover, pro-
grammers  communicating  ideas  to  one  another  almost  inevitably  communicate  in  code,  much  as 
musicians use notes.  Limiting First Amendment protection of programmers to descriptions of com-
puter code (but not the code itself) would impede discourse among computer scholars, just as limit-
ing protection for musicians to descriptions of musical scores (but not sequences of notes) would 
impede their exchange of ideas and expression. Instructions that communicate information compre-
hensible  to  a  human  qualify  as  speech  whether  the  instructions  are  designed  for  execution  by  a 
computer or a human (or both). 

For all of these reasons, we join the other courts that have concluded that computer code, and 

computer programs constructed from code, can merit First Amendment protection. 

 3. The Scope of First Amendment Protection for Computer Code 
Having  concluded  that  computer  code  conveying  information  is  "speech"  [*450]  within  the 
meaning of the First Amendment, we next consider, to a limited extent, the scope of the protection 
that code enjoys. As the District Court recognized, the scope of protection for speech generally de-
pends on whether the restriction is imposed because of the content of the speech. Content-based re-
strictions are permissible only if they serve compelling state interests and do so by the least restric-
tive means available. A content-neutral restriction is permissible if it serves a substantial govern-
mental interest, the interest is unrelated to the suppression of free expression, and the regulation is 
narrowly tailored, which "in this context requires . . . that the means chosen do not 'burden substan-
tially more speech than is necessary to further the government's legitimate interests.'"  

"Government regulation of expressive activity is 'content neutral' if it is justified without refer-
ence to the content of regulated speech." The government's purpose is the controlling consideration. 

 

11 

 

A regulation that serves purposes unrelated to the content of expression is deemed neutral, even if it 
has an incidental effect on some speakers or messages but not others." The Supreme Court's ap-
proach to determining content-neutrality appears to be applicable whether what is regulated is ex-
pression, conduct, or any "activity" that can be said to combine speech and non-speech elements. 

To determine whether regulation of computer code is content-neutral, the initial inquiry must be 
whether the regulated activity is "sufficiently imbued with elements of communication to fall within 
the scope of the First . . . Amendment[]."  Computer code, as we have noted, often conveys infor-
mation comprehensible to human beings, even as it also directs a computer to perform various func-
tions. Once a speech component [*451] is identified, the inquiry then proceeds to whether the regu-
lation is "justified without reference to the content of regulated speech."  

The Appellants vigorously reject the idea that computer code can be regulated according to any 
different standard than that applicable to pure speech, i.e., speech that lacks a nonspeech compo-
nent. Although recognizing that code is a series of instructions to a computer, they argue that code 
is no different, for First Amendment purposes, than blueprints that instruct an engineer or recipes 
that instruct a cook.  We disagree. Unlike a blueprint or a recipe, which cannot yield any functional 
result  without  human  comprehension  of  its  content,  human  decision-making,  and  human  action, 
computer code can instantly cause a computer to accomplish tasks and instantly render the results of 
those  tasks  available  throughout  the  world  via  the  Internet.  The  only  human  action  required  to 
achieve these results can be as limited and instantaneous as a single click of a mouse. These realities 
of what code is and what its normal functions are require a First Amendment analysis that treats 
code as combining nonspeech and speech elements, i.e., functional and expressive elements.  

We recognize, as did Judge Kaplan, that the functional capability of computer code cannot yield 
a  result  until  a  human  being  decides  to  insert  the  disk  containing  the  code  into  a  computer  and 
causes it to perform its function (or programs a computer to cause the code to perform its function). 
Nevertheless, this momentary intercession of human action does not diminish the nonspeech com-
ponent of code, nor render code entirely speech, like a blueprint or a recipe. Judge Kaplan, in a pas-
sage that merits extensive quotation, cogently explained why this is especially so with respect to 
decryption code: 
  

   The focus on functionality in order to determine the level of scrutiny is not an inevi-
table consequence of the speech-conduct distinction. Conduct has immediate effects on 
the environment. Computer code, on the other hand, no matter how functional, causes a 
computer to perform the intended operations only if someone uses the code to do so. 
Hence,  one  commentator,  in  a  thoughtful  article,  has  maintained  that  functionality  is 
really "a proxy for effects or harm" and that its adoption as a determinant of the level of 
scrutiny slides over questions of causation that intervene between the dissemination of 
a computer program and any harm caused by its use. 

The characterization of functionality as a proxy for the consequences of use is accu-
rate. But the assumption that the chain of causation is too attenuated to justify the use 
of functionality to determine the level of scrutiny, at least in this context, is not. 

Society  increasingly  depends  upon  technological  means  of  controlling  access  to 
digital files and systems, whether they are military computers, bank records, academic 
records,  copyrighted  works  or  something  else  entirely.  There  are  far  too  many  who, 
given any opportunity, will bypass security measures,  [*452]  some for the sheer joy of 

 

12 

 

doing it, some for innocuous reasons, and others for more malevolent purposes. Given 
the virtually instantaneous and worldwide dissemination widely available via the Inter-
net, the only rational assumption is that once a computer program capable of bypassing 
such an access control system is disseminated, it will be used. And that is not all. 

There was a time when copyright infringement could be dealt with quite adequately 
by focusing on the infringing act. If someone wished to make and sell high quality but 
unauthorized copies of a copyrighted book, for example,  the infringer needed a print-
ing  press.  The  copyright  holder,  once  aware  of  the  appearance  of  infringing  copies, 
usually was able to trace the copies up the chain of distribution, find and prosecute the 
infringer, and shut off the infringement at the source. 

In  principle,  the  digital  world  is  very  different.  Once  a  decryption  program  like 
DeCSS is written, it quickly can be sent all over the world. Every recipient is capable 
not only of decrypting and perfectly copying plaintiffs' copyrighted DVDs, but also of 
retransmitting  perfect  copies  of  DeCSS  and  thus  enabling  every  recipient  to  do  the 
same. They likewise are capable of transmitting perfect copies of the decrypted DVD. 
The process potentially is exponential rather than linear. 

. . . 
These considerations drastically alter consideration of the causal link between dis-
semination of computer programs such as this and their illicit use. Causation in the law 
ultimately involves practical policy judgments. Here, dissemination itself carries very 
substantial risk of imminent harm because the mechanism is so unusual by which dis-
semination of means of circumventing access controls to copyrighted works threatens 
to produce virtually unstoppable infringement of copyright. In consequence, the causal 
link  between  the  dissemination  of  circumvention  computer  programs  and  their  im-
proper use is more than sufficiently close to warrant selection of a level of constitu-
tional scrutiny based on the programs' functionality. 

  
The functionality of computer code properly affects the scope of its First Amendment protection. 

4. The Scope of First Amendment Protection for Decryption Code 
In considering the scope of First Amendment protection for a decryption program like DeCSS, 
we must recognize that the essential purpose of encryption code is to prevent unauthorized access. 
Owners of all property rights are entitled to prohibit access to their property by unauthorized per-
sons. Homeowners can install locks on the doors of their houses. Custodians of valuables can place 
them in safes. Stores can attach to products security devices that will activate alarms if the products 
are taken away without purchase. These and similar security devices can be circumvented. Burglars 
can use skeleton keys to open door locks. Thieves can obtain the combinations to safes. Product se-
curity devices can be neutralized. 

Our case concerns a security device, CSS computer code, that prevents access by unauthorized 
persons to DVD movies. The CSS code is embedded in the DVD movie. Access to the movie can-
not be obtained unless a person has a device, a licensed DVD player, equipped with computer code 
capable of decrypting the CSS encryption code. In its basic function,  [*453] CSS is like a lock on a 
homeowner's door, a combination of a safe, or a security device attached to a store's products. 

 

13 

 

DeCSS is computer code that can decrypt CSS. In its basic function, it is like a skeleton key that 
can open a locked door, a combination that can open a safe, or a device that can neutralize the secu-
rity device attached to a store's products. DeCSS enables anyone to gain access to a DVD movie 
without using a DVD player. 

The initial use of DeCSS to gain access to a DVD movie creates no loss to movie producers be-
cause the initial user must purchase the DVD. However, once the DVD is purchased, DeCSS en-
ables the initial user to copy the movie in digital form and transmit it instantly in virtually limitless 
quantity, thereby depriving the movie producer of sales. The advent of the Internet creates the po-
tential for instantaneous worldwide distribution of the copied material. 

At first glance, one might think that Congress has as much authority to regulate the distribution 
of computer code to decrypt DVD movies as it has to regulate distribution of skeleton keys, combi-
nations to safes, or devices to neutralize store product security devices. However, despite the evi-
dent legitimacy of protection against unauthorized access to DVD movies, just like any other prop-
erty, regulation of decryption code like DeCSS is challenged in this case because DeCSS differs 
from a skeleton key in one important respect: it not only is capable of performing the function of 
unlocking the encrypted DVD movie, it also is a form of communication, albeit written in a lan-
guage not understood by the general public. As a communication, the DeCSS code has a claim to 
being "speech," and as "speech," it has a claim to being protected by the First Amendment. But just 
as the realities of what any computer code can accomplish must inform the scope of its constitu-
tional protection, so the capacity of a decryption program like DeCSS to accomplish unauthorized--
indeed, unlawful--access to materials in which the Plaintiffs have intellectual property rights must 
inform and limit the scope of its First Amendment protection.  

With  all  of  the  foregoing  considerations  in  mind,  we  next  consider  the  Appellants'  First 
Amendment challenge to the DMCA as applied in the specific prohibitions that have been imposed 
by the District Court's injunction. 
 
B. First Amendment Challenge  

The District Court's injunction applies the DMCA to the Defendants by imposing two types of 
prohibition, both grounded on the anti-trafficking provisions of the DMCA. The first prohibits post-
ing DeCSS or any other technology for circumventing CSS on any Internet web site. The second 
prohibits knowingly linking any Internet web site to any other web site containing DeCSS.  The va-
lidity of the posting and linking prohibitions must be considered separately. 

1. Posting 
The  initial  issue  is  whether  the  posting  prohibition  is  content-neutral,  since,  as  we  have  ex-
plained, this classification [*454]  determines the applicable constitutional standard. The Appellants 
contend  that  the  anti-trafficking  provisions  of  the  DMCA  and  their  application  by  means  of  the 
posting prohibition of the injunction are content-based. They argue that the provisions "specifically 
target . . . scientific expression based on the particular topic addressed by that expression--namely, 
techniques for circumventing CSS."  We disagree. The Appellants' argument fails to recognize that 
the target of the posting provisions of the injunction--DeCSS--has both a nonspeech and a speech 
component, and that the DMCA, as applied to the Appellants, and the posting prohibition of the in-
junction target only the nonspeech component. Neither the DMCA nor the posting prohibition is 
concerned with whatever capacity DeCSS might have for conveying information to a human being, 

 

14 

 

and that capacity, as previously explained, is what arguably creates a speech component of the de-
cryption code. The DMCA and the posting prohibition are applied to DeCSS solely because of its 
capacity to instruct a computer to decrypt CSS. That functional capability is not speech within the 
meaning of the First Amendment. The Government seeks to "justify," both the application of the 
DMCA and the posting prohibition to the Appellants solely on the basis of the functional capability 
of DeCSS to instruct a computer to decrypt CSS, i.e., "without reference to the content of the regu-
lated speech," This type of regulation is therefore content-neutral, just as would be a restriction on 
trafficking  in  skeleton  keys  identified  because  of  their  capacity  to  unlock  jail  cells,  even  though 
some of the keys happened to bear a slogan or other legend that qualified as a speech component. 

As a content-neutral regulation with an incidental effect on a speech component, the regulation 
must serve a substantial governmental interest, the interest must be unrelated to the suppression of 
free expression, and  the incidental restriction on speech must not burden substantially more speech 
than is necessary to further that interest.  The Government's interest in preventing unauthorized ac-
cess to encrypted copyrighted material is unquestionably substantial, and the regulation of DeCSS 
by  the  posting  prohibition  plainly  serves  that  interest.  Moreover,  that  interest  is  unrelated  to  the 
suppression  of  free  expression.  The  injunction  regulates  the  posting  of  DeCSS,  regardless  of 
whether DeCSS code contains any information comprehensible by human beings that would qualify 
as speech. Whether the incidental regulation on speech burdens substantially more speech than is 
necessary to further the interest in preventing unauthorized access to copyrighted materials requires 
some elaboration. 

Posting DeCSS on the Appellants' web site makes it instantly available at the click of a mouse 
to any person in the world with access to the Internet, and such person can then instantly transmit 
DeCSS to anyone else with Internet access. Although the prohibition on posting prevents the Appel-
lants from conveying to others the speech component of DeCSS, the Appellants have not suggested, 
much less shown, any technique for barring them from making this instantaneous worldwide distri-
bution of a decryption code that makes a lesser restriction on the code's speech component.  It is 
true that the [*455] Government has alternative means of prohibiting unauthorized access to copy-
righted materials. For example, it can create criminal and civil liability for those who gain unauthor-
ized access, and thus it can be argued that the restriction on posting DeCSS is not absolutely neces-
sary  to  preventing  unauthorized  access  to  copyrighted  materials.  But  a content-neutral  regulation 
need not employ the least restrictive means of accomplishing the governmental objective. It need 
only avoid burdening "substantially more speech than is necessary to further the government's le-
gitimate interests."  The prohibition on the Defendants' posting of DeCSS satisfies that standard.  

2. Linking 
In considering linking, we need to clarify the sense in which the injunction prohibits such activ-
ity. Although the injunction defines several terms, it does not define "linking." Nevertheless, it is 
evident from the District Court's opinion that it is concerned with "hyperlinks," A hyperlink is a 
cross-reference (in a distinctive font or color) appearing on one web page that, when activated by 
the point-and-click of a mouse, brings onto the computer screen another web page. The hyperlink 
can appear on a screen (window) as text, such  as the Internet address ("URL") of the web page be-
ing called up or a word or phrase that identifies the web page to be called up, for example, "DeCSS 
web site." Or the hyperlink can appear as an image, for example, an icon depicting a person sitting 
at a computer watching a DVD movie and text stating "click here to access DeCSS and see DVD 
movies for free!" The code for the web page containing the hyperlink includes a computer instruc-

 

15 

 

tion that associates the link with the URL of the web page to be accessed, such that clicking on the 
hyperlink instructs the computer to enter the URL of the desired web page and thereby access that 
page. With a hyperlink on a web page, the linked web site is just one click away.  

[*456]  In applying the DMCA to linking (via hyperlinks), Judge Kaplan recognized, as he had 
with DeCSS code, that a hyperlink has both a speech and a nonspeech component. It conveys in-
formation, the Internet address of the linked web page, and has the functional capacity to bring the 
content of the linked web page to the user's computer screen (or, as Judge Kaplan put it, to "take 
one almost instantaneously to the desired destination." As he had ruled with respect to DeCSS code, 
he ruled that application of the DMCA to the Defendants' linking to web sites containing DeCSS is 
content-neutral because it is justified without regard to the speech component of the hyperlink.  The 
linking prohibition applies whether or not the hyperlink contains any information, comprehensible 
to a human being, as to the Internet address of the web page being accessed. The linking prohibition 
is justified solely by the functional capability of the hyperlink. 

Applying  the  O'Brien/Ward/Turner  Broadcasting  requirements  for  content-neutral  regulation, 
Judge Kaplan then ruled that the DMCA, as applied to the Defendants' linking, served substantial 
governmental interests and was unrelated  to the suppression of free expression.  We agree. He then 
carefully considered the "closer call," as to whether a linking prohibition would satisfy the narrow 
tailoring requirement. In an especially carefully considered portion of his opinion, he observed that 
strict liability for linking to web sites containing DeCSS would risk two impairments of free expres-
sion. Web site operators would be inhibited from displaying links to various web pages for fear that 
a linked page might contain DeCSS, and a prohibition on linking to a web site containing DeCSS 
would curtail access to whatever other information was contained at the accessed site.  

To avoid applying the DMCA in a manner that would "burden substantially more speech than is 
necessary to further the government's legitimate interests," Judge Kaplan adapted the standards of 
New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 283 (1964), to fashion a limited prohibition against 
linking to web sites containing DeCSS. He required clear and convincing evidence  
  

   that those responsible for the link (a) know at the relevant time that the offending ma-
terial is on the linked-to site, (b) know that it is circumvention technology that may not 
lawfully be offered, and (c) create or maintain the link for the purpose of disseminating 
that technology. 

  
He then found that the evidence satisfied his three-part test by his required standard of proof.  

In response to our post-argument request for the parties' views on various issues, including spe-
cifically Judge Kaplan's test for a linking prohibition, the Appellants replied that his test was defi-
cient for not requiring proof of intent to cause, or aid or abet, harm, and that the only valid test for a 
linking prohibition would be one that could validly apply to the publication in a print medium of an 
address  for  obtaining  prohibited  material.  The  Appellees  and  the  Government  accepted  [*457]  
Judge Kaplan's criteria for purposes of asserting the validity of the injunction as applied to the Ap-
pellants, with the Government expressing reservations as to the standard of clear and convincing 
evidence.  

Mindful of the cautious approach to First Amendment claims involving computer technology 
expressed in Name.Space, 202 F.3d at 584 n.11, we see no need on this appeal to determine whether 
a test as rigorous as Judge Kaplan's is required to respond to First Amendment objections to the 

 

16 

 

linking provision of the injunction that he issued. It suffices to reject the Appellants' contention that 
an intent to cause harm is required and that linking can be enjoined only under circumstances appli-
cable to a print medium. As they have throughout their arguments, the Appellants ignore the reality 
of  the  functional  capacity  of  decryption  computer  code  and  hyperlinks  to  facilitate  instantaneous 
unauthorized access to copyrighted materials by anyone anywhere in the world. Under the circum-
stances amply shown by the record, the injunction's linking prohibition validly regulates the Appel-
lants' opportunity instantly to enable anyone anywhere to gain unauthorized access to copyrighted 
movies on DVDs. 

At oral argument, we asked the Government whether its undoubted power to punish the distribu-
tion  of  obscene  materials  would  permit  an  injunction  prohibiting  a  newspaper  from  printing  ad-
dresses of bookstore locations carrying such materials. In a properly cautious response, the Gov-
ernment stated that the answer would depend on the circumstances of the publication. The Appel-
lants' supplemental papers enthusiastically embraced the arguable analogy between printing book-
store addresses and displaying on a web page links to web sites at which DeCSS may be accessed. 
They confidently asserted that publication of bookstore locations carrying obscene material cannot 
be enjoined consistent with the First Amendment, and that a prohibition against linking to web sites 
containing DeCSS is similarly invalid. 

Like many analogies posited to illuminate legal issues, the bookstore analogy is helpful primar-
ily  in  identifying  characteristics  that  distinguish  it  from  the  context  of  the  pending  dispute.  If  a 
bookstore proprietor is knowingly selling obscene materials, the evil of distributing such materials 
can be prevented by injunctive relief against the unlawful distribution (and similar distribution by 
others can be deterred by punishment of the distributor). And if others publish the location of the 
bookstore, preventive relief against a distributor can be effective before any significant distribution 
of the prohibited materials has occurred. The digital world, however, creates a very different prob-
lem. If obscene materials are posted on one web site and other sites post hyperlinks to the first site, 
the materials are available for instantaneous worldwide distribution before any preventive measures 
can be effectively taken. 

This reality obliges courts considering First Amendment claims in the context of the pending 
case to choose between two unattractive alternatives: either tolerate some impairment of communi-
cation in order [*458] to permit Congress to prohibit decryption that may lawfully be prevented, or 
tolerate some decryption in order to avoid some impairment of communication. Although the par-
ties dispute the extent of impairment of communication if the injunction is upheld and the extent of 
decryption if it is vacated, and differ on the availability and effectiveness of techniques for minimiz-
ing both consequences, the fundamental choice between impairing some communication and toler-
ating decryption cannot be entirely avoided. 

In facing this choice, we are mindful that it is not for us to resolve the issues of public policy 
implicated by the choice we have identified. Those issues are for Congress. Our task is to determine 
whether the legislative solution adopted by Congress, as applied to the Appellants by the District 
Court's injunction, is consistent with the limitations of the First Amendment, and we are satisfied 
that it is. 
 

 

17 

 

 

IV. Constitutional Challenge Based on Claimed Restriction of Fair Use 

Asserting  that  fair  use  "is  rooted  in  and  required  by  both  the  Copyright  Clause  and  the  First 
Amendment," the Appellants contend that the DMCA, as applied by the District Court, unconstitu-
tionally "eliminates fair use" of copyrighted materials. We reject this extravagant claim. 

Preliminarily, we note that the Supreme Court has never held that fair use is constitutionally re-
quired, although some isolated statements in its opinions might arguably be enlisted for such a re-
quirement.  In  Stewart  v.  Abend,  495  U.S.  207  (1990),  cited  by  the  Appellants,  the  Court  merely 
noted that fair use "'permits courts to avoid rigid application of the copyright statute when, on occa-
sion, it would stifle the very creativity which that law is designed to foster.'"  In Campbell v. Acuff-
Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 (1994), the Court observed, "From the infancy of copyright protec-
tion, some opportunity for fair use of copyrighted materials has been thought necessary to fulfill 
copyright's very purpose, 'to promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts . . . .'"7 

We need not explore the extent to which fair use might have constitutional protection, grounded 
on either the First Amendment or the Copyright Clause, because whatever validity a constitutional 
claim might have as to an application of the DMCA that impairs fair use of copyrighted materials, 
such matters are far beyond the [*459] scope of this lawsuit for several reasons. In the first place, 
the Appellants do not claim to be making fair use of any copyrighted materials, and nothing in the 
injunction prohibits them from making such fair use. They are barred from trafficking in a decryp-
tion code that enables unauthorized access to copyrighted materials. 

Second, as the District Court properly noted, to whatever extent the anti-trafficking provisions 
of the DMCA might prevent others from copying portions of DVD movies in order to make fair use 
of them, "the evidence as to the impact of the anti-trafficking provisions of the DMCA on prospec-
tive fair users is scanty and fails adequately to address the issues."  

Third, the Appellants have provided no support for their premise that fair use of DVD movies is 
constitutionally required to be made by copying the original work in its original format.8  Their ex-
amples of the fair uses that they believe others will be prevented from making all involve copying in 
a digital format those portions of a DVD movie amenable to fair use, a copying that would enable 
the fair user to manipulate the digitally copied portions. One example is that of a school child who 
wishes to copy images from a DVD movie to insert into the student's documentary film. We know 
of   no authority for the proposition that fair use, as protected by the Copyright Act, much less the 
Constitution, guarantees copying by the optimum method or in the identical format of the original. 
Although the Appellants insisted at oral argument that they should not be relegated to a "horse and 

                          
7 Although we have recognized that the First Amendment provides no entitlement to use copyrighted materials beyond 
that accorded by the privilege of fair use, except in "an extraordinary case," Twin Peaks Productions, Inc. v. Publica-
tions International, Ltd., 996 F.2d 1366, 1378 (2d Cir. 1993), we have not ruled that the Constitution guarantees any 
particular formulation or minimum availability of the fair use defense. 
8 As expressed in their supplemental papers, the position of the Appellants is that "fair use extends to works in what-
ever form they are offered to the public," by which we understand the Appellants to contend not merely that fair use 
may be made of DVD movies but that the fair user must be permitted access to the digital version of the DVD in order 
to directly copy excerpts for fair use in a digital format.  

 

18 

 

buggy" technique in making fair use of DVD movies,9 the DMCA does not impose even an argu-
able limitation on the opportunity to make a variety of traditional fair uses of DVD movies, such as 
commenting on their content, quoting excerpts from their screenplays, and even recording portions 
of the video images and sounds on film or tape by pointing a camera, a camcorder, or a microphone 
at a monitor as it displays the DVD movie. The fact that the resulting copy will not be as perfect or 
as manipulable as a digital copy obtained by having direct access to the DVD movie in its digital 
form, provides no basis for a claim of unconstitutional limitation of fair use. A film critic making 
fair use of a movie by quoting selected lines of dialogue has no constitutionally valid claim that the 
review (in print or on television) would be technologically superior if the reviewer had not been 
prevented from using a movie camera in the theater, nor has an art student a valid constitutional 
claim to fair use of a painting by photographing it in a museum. Fair use has never been held to be a 
guarantee of access to copyrighted material in order to copy it by the fair user's preferred technique 
or in the format of the original. 

 

  Conclusion 

We have considered all the other arguments of the Appellants and conclude that [*460] they 
provide  no  basis  for  disturbing  the  District  Court's  judgment.  Accordingly,  the  judgment  is  af-
firmed.   

                          
9 In their supplemental papers, the Appellants contend, rather hyperbolically, that a prohibition on using copying ma-
chines to assist in making fair use of texts could not validly be upheld by the availability of "monks to scribe the rele-
vant passages."  
 

 

19 

