VIACOM INTERNATIONAL, INC. v. YOUTUBE, INC.  

676 F.3d 19 

United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit. 

Decided: April 5, 2012. 

7 

8 

9 

10 

JOSÉ A. CABRANES, Circuit Judge: 

This  appeal  requires  us  to  clarify  the  contours  of  the  “safe  harbor”  provision  of  the 
Digital  Millennium  Copyright  Act  (DMCA)  that  limits  the  liability  of  online  service 
providers  for  copyright  infringement  that  occurs  “by  reason  of  the  storage  at  the 
direction of a user of material that resides on a system or network controlled or operated 
by or for the service provider.” 17 U.S.C. § 512(c).[1] 

The plaintiffs-appellants in these related actions—Viacom International, Inc. (“Viacom”), 
The  Football  Association  Premier  League  Ltd.  (“Premier  League”),  and  various  film 
studios, television networks, music publishers, and sports leagues (jointly, [676 F.3d 26] 
the  “plaintiffs”)[2]  —appeal  from  an  August  10,  2010  judgment  of  the  United  States 
District Court for the Southern District of New York (Louis L. Stanton, Judge), which 
granted summary judgment to defendants-appellees YouTube, Inc., YouTube, LLC, and 
Google Inc. (jointly, “YouTube” or the “defendants”). The plaintiffs alleged direct and 
secondary  copyright  infringement  based  on  the  public  performance,  display,  and 
reproduction of approximately 79,000 audiovisual “clips” that appeared on the YouTube 
website between 2005 and 2008. They demanded, inter alia, statutory damages pursuant 
to 17 U.S.C. § 504(c) or, in the alternative, actual damages from the alleged infringement, 
as well as declaratory and injunctive relief.[3] 

In a June 23, 2010 Opinion and Order (the “June 23 Opinion”), the District Court held 
that the defendants were entitled to DMCA safe harbor protection primarily because they 
had  insufficient  notice  of  the  particular  infringements  in  suit.  Viacom  Int'l,  Inc.  v. 
YouTube, Inc., 718 F.Supp.2d 514, 529 (S.D.N.Y.2010). In construing the statutory safe 
harbor, the District Court concluded that the “actual knowledge” or “aware[ness] of facts 
or  circumstances”  that  would  disqualify  an  online  service  provider  from  safe  harbor 
protection  under  §  512(c)(1)(A)  refer  to  “knowledge  of  specific  and  identifiable 
infringements.”  [...]  The  District  Court  further  held  that  item-specific  knowledge  of 
infringing  activity  is  required  for  a  service  provider  to  have  the  “right  and  ability  to 
control” infringing activity under § 512(c)(1)(B). [...] Finally, the District Court held that 
the  replication,  transmittal,  and  display  of  videos  on  YouTube  constituted  activity  “by 
reason of the storage at the direction of a user” within the meaning of § 512(c)(1). [...] 

11  These related cases present a series of significant questions of statutory construction. We 
conclude  that  the  District  Court  correctly  held  that  the  §  512(c)  safe  harbor  requires 
knowledge or awareness of specific infringing activity, but we vacate the order granting 
summary  judgment  because  a  reasonable  jury  could  find  that  YouTube  had  actual 
knowledge or awareness of specific infringing activity on its website. We further hold that 
the  District  Court  erred  by  interpreting  the  “right  and  ability  to  control”  provision  to 
require  “item-specific”  knowledge.  Finally,  we  affirm  the  District  Court's  holding  that 
three  of  the  challenged  YouTube  software  functions  fall  within  the  safe  harbor  for 

Viacom v. YouTube!

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

infringement that occurs “by reason of” user storage; we remand for further fact-finding 
with respect to a fourth software function. 

BACKGROUND 

A. The DMCA Safe Harbors 

14 

“The  DMCA  was  enacted  in  1998  to  implement  the  World  Intellectual  Property 
Organization Copyright Treaty,” Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 440 
(2d Cir.2001), and to update domestic copyright law for the digital age, [676 F.3d 27] [...]. 
Title  II  of  the  DMCA,  separately  titled  the  “Online  Copyright  Infringement  Liability 
Limitation  Act”  (OCILLA),  was  designed  to  “clarif[y]  the  liability  faced  by  service 
providers  who  transmit  potentially  infringing  material  over  their  networks.”  [...]  But 
“[r]ather than embarking upon a wholesale clarification” of various copyright doctrines, 
Congress elected “to leave current law in its evolving state and, instead, to create a series 
of ‘safe harbors[ ]’ for certain common activities of service providers.” [...] To that end, 
OCILLA  established  a  series  of  four  “safe  harbors”  that  allow  qualifying  service 
providers  to  limit  their  liability  for  claims  of  copyright  infringement  based  on  (a) 
“transitory  digital  network  communications,”  (b)  “system  caching,”  (c)  “information 
residing on systems or networks at [the] direction of users,” and (d) “information location 
tools.” 17 U.S.C. § 512(a)-(d). 

15  To  qualify  for  protection  under  any  of  the  safe  harbors,  a  party  must  meet  a  set  of 
threshold  criteria.  First,  the  party  must  in  fact  be  a  “service  provider,”  defined,  in 
pertinent  part,  as  “a  provider  of  online  services  or  network  access,  or  the  operator  of 
facilities therefor.” 17 U.S.C. § 512(k)(1)(B). A party that qualifies as a service provider 
must also satisfy certain “conditions of eligibility,” including the adoption and reasonable 
implementation  of  a  “repeat  infringer”  policy  that  “provides  for  the  termination  in 
appropriate  circumstances  of  subscribers  and  account  holders  of  the  service  provider's 
system  or  network.”  Id.  §  512(i)(1)(A).  In  addition,  a  qualifying  service  provider  must 
accommodate  “standard  technical  measures”  that  are  “used  by  copyright  owners  to 
identify or protect copyrighted works.” Id. § 512(i)(1)(B), (i)(2). 

16  Beyond  the  threshold  criteria,  a  service  provider  must  satisfy  the  requirements  of  a 
particular  safe  harbor.  In  this  case,  the  safe  harbor  at  issue  is  §  512(c),  which  covers 
infringement  claims  that  arise  “by  reason  of  the  storage  at  the  direction  of  a  user  of 
material that resides on a system or network controlled or operated by or for the service 
provider.” Id. § 512(c)(1). The § 512(c) safe harbor will apply only if the service provider: 

17 

(A)  (i)  does  not  have  actual  knowledge  that  the  material  or  an  activity  using  the 
material on the system or network is infringing; 

(ii)  in  the  absence  of  such  actual  knowledge,  is  not  aware  of  facts  or 
circumstances from which infringing activity is apparent; or 

(iii) upon obtaining such knowledge or awareness, acts expeditiously to remove, 
or disable access to, the material; 

(B) does not receive a financial benefit directly attributable to the infringing activity, 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

in  a  case  in  which  the  service  provider  has  the  right  and  ability  to  control  such 
activity; and 

(C)  upon  notification  of  claimed  infringement  as  described  in  paragraph  (3), 
responds expeditiously to remove, or disable access to, the material that is claimed 
to be infringing or to be the subject of infringing activity. 

18 

Id.  § 512(c)(1)(A)-(C). Section 512(c) also sets forth a detailed notification scheme that 
requires  service  providers  to  “designate[  ]  an  agent  to  receive  notifications  of  claimed 
infringement,”  id.  §  512(c)(2),  and  specifies  the  components  of  a  proper  notification, 
commonly known as a “takedown notice,” to that agent, see id. § 512(c)(3). Thus, actual 
knowledge  of  infringing  material,  awareness  of  facts  or  circumstances  that  make 
infringing activity apparent, or [676 F.3d 28] receipt of a takedown notice will each trigger 
an obligation to expeditiously remove the infringing material. 

19  With the statutory context in mind, we now turn to the facts of this case. 

B. Factual Background 

21  YouTube  was  founded  in  February  2005  by  Chad  Hurley  (“Hurley”),  Steve  Chen 
(“Chen”), and Jawed Karim (“Karim”), three former employees of the internet company 
Paypal.  When  YouTube  announced  the  “official  launch”  of  the  website  in  December 
2005, a press release described YouTube as a “consumer media company” that “allows 
people to watch, upload, and share personal video clips at www. You Tube. com.” Under 
the slogan “Broadcast yourself,” YouTube achieved rapid prominence and profitability, 
eclipsing  competitors  such  as  Google  Video  and  Yahoo  Video  by  wide  margins.  In 
November  2006,  Google  acquired  YouTube  in  a  stock-for-stock  transaction  valued  at 
$1.65 billion. By March 2010, at the time of summary judgment briefing in this litigation, 
site traffic on YouTube had soared to more than 1 billion daily video views, with more 
than 24 hours of new video uploaded to the site every minute. 

22  The  basic  function  of  the  YouTube  website  permits  users  to  “upload”  and  view  video 
clips free of charge. Before uploading a video to YouTube, a user must register and create 
an  account  with  the  website.  The  registration  process  requires  the  user  to  accept 
YouTube's  Terms  of  Use  agreement,  which  provides,  inter  alia,  that  the  user  “will  not 
submit  material  that  is  copyrighted  ...  unless  [he  is]  the  owner  of  such  rights  or  ha[s] 
permission from their rightful owner to post the material and to grant YouTube all of the 
license  rights  granted  herein.”  When  the  registration  process  is  complete,  the  user  can 
sign in to his account, select a video to upload from the user's personal computer, mobile 
phone, or other device, and instruct the YouTube system to upload the video by clicking 
on a virtual upload “button.” 

23  Uploading  a  video  to  the  YouTube  website  triggers  a  series  of  automated  software 
functions. During the upload process, YouTube makes one or more exact copies of the 
video in its original file format. YouTube also makes one or more additional copies of the 
video in “Flash” format,[4] a process known as “transcoding.” The transcoding process 
ensures that YouTube videos are available for viewing by most users at their request. The 
YouTube system allows users to gain access to video content by “streaming” the video to 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

the  user's  computer  in  response  to  a  playback  request.  YouTube  uses  a  computer 
algorithm to identify clips that are “related” to a video the user watches and display links 
to the “related” clips. 

C. Procedural History 

25 

Plaintiff  Viacom,  an  American  media  conglomerate,  and  various  Viacom  affiliates  filed 
suit  against  YouTube  on  March  13,  2007,  alleging  direct  and  secondary  copyright 
infringement[5]  based  on  the  public  performance,  display,  and  reproduction  of  their 
audiovisual works on the YouTube website. Plaintiff Premier League, an English soccer 
league,  and  Plaintiff  Bourne  Co.  filed  a  putative  class  action  against  [676  F.3d  29] 
YouTube on May 4, 2007, alleging direct and secondary copyright infringement on behalf 
of  all  copyright  owners  whose  material  was  copied,  stored,  displayed,  or  performed  on 
YouTube  without  authorization.  Specifically  at  issue  were  some  63,497  video  clips 
identified  by  Viacom,  as  well  as  13,500  additional  clips  (jointly,  the  “clips-in-suit”) 
identified by the putative class plaintiffs. 

26  The  plaintiffs  in  both  actions  principally  demanded  statutory  damages  pursuant  to  17 
U.S.C. § 504(c) or, in the alternative, actual damages plus the defendants' profits from the 
alleged  infringement,  as  well  as  declaratory  and  injunctive  relief.[6]  Judge  Stanton,  to 
whom  the  Viacom  action  was  assigned,  accepted  the  Premier  League  class  action  as 
related.  At  the  close  of  discovery,  the  parties  in  both  actions  cross-moved  for  partial 
summary judgment with respect to the applicability of the DMCA safe harbor defense.[7] 

27 

28 

29 

In the dual-captioned June 23 Opinion, the District Court denied the plaintiffs' motions 
and  granted  summary  judgment  to  the  defendants,  finding  that  YouTube  qualified  for 
DMCA  safe  harbor  protection  with  respect  to  all  claims  of  direct  and  secondary 
copyright infringement. [...] The District Court prefaced its analysis of the DMCA safe 
harbor by holding that, based on the plaintiffs' summary judgment submissions, “a jury 
could  find  that  the  defendants  not  only  were  generally  aware  of,  but  welcomed, 
copyright-infringing  material  being  placed  on  their  website.”  [...]  However,  the  District 
Court  also  noted  that  the  defendants  had  properly  designated  an  agent  pursuant  to  § 
512(c)(2),  and  “when  they  received  specific  notice  that  a  particular  item  infringed  a 
copyright, they swiftly removed it.” [...] Accordingly, the District Court identified the crux 
of the inquiry with respect to YouTube's copyright liability as follows: 

[T]he critical question is whether the statutory phrases “actual knowledge that the 
material or an activity using the material on the system or network is infringing,” 
and  “facts  or  circumstances  from  which  infringing  activity  is  apparent”  in  § 
512(c)(1)(A)(i) and (ii) mean a general awareness that there are infringements (here, 
claimed  to  be  widespread  and  common),  or  rather  mean  actual  or  constructive 
knowledge of specific and identifiable infringements of individual items. 

[...] After quoting at length from the legislative history of the DMCA, the District Court 
held that “the phrases ‘actual knowledge that the material or an activity’ is infringing, and 
‘facts or circumstances' indicating infringing activity, describe knowledge of specific and 
identifiable  infringements  of  particular  individual  items.”  [...]  “Mere  knowledge  of  [the] 
prevalence of such activity in general,” the District Court concluded, “is not enough.” [...] 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

30 

In a final section labeled “Other Points,” the District Court rejected two additional claims. 
First,  it  rejected  the  plaintiffs'  argument  that  the  replication,  transmittal  and  display  of 
YouTube  videos  are  functions  that  fall  outside  the  protection  §  512(c)(1)  affords  for 
“infringement  of  copyright  by  reason  of  ...  storage  at  the  direction  of  the  user.”  [...] 
Second, it rejected the plaintiffs' argument [676 F.3d 30] that YouTube was ineligible for 
safe harbor protection under the control provision, holding that the “right and ability to 
control”  infringing  activity  under  §  512(c)(1)(B)  requires  “item-specific”  knowledge 
thereof, because “the provider must know of the particular case before he can control it.” 
[...] 

31 

Following  the  June  23  Opinion,  final  judgment  in  favor  of  YouTube  was  entered  on 
August 10, 2010. These appeals followed. 

DISCUSSION 

33  We review an order granting summary judgment de novo, drawing all factual inferences 
in  favor  of  the  non-moving  party.  [...]  “Summary  judgment  is  proper  only  when, 
construing  the  evidence  in  the  light  most  favorable  to  the  non-movant,  ‘there  is  no 
genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter 
of law.’ ” [...] 

A. Actual and “Red Flag” Knowledge: § 512(c)(1)(A) 

 The first and most important question on appeal is whether the DMCA safe harbor at 
issue  requires  “actual  knowledge”  or  “aware[ness]”  of  facts  or  circumstances  indicating 
“specific and identifiable infringements,” [...]. We consider first the scope of the statutory 
provision and then its application to the record in this case. 

1. The Specificity Requirement 

“As  in  all  statutory  construction  cases,  we  begin  with  the  language  of  the  statute,”  [...] 
Under § 512(c)(1)(A), safe harbor protection is available only if the service provider: 

(i) does not have actual knowledge that the material or an activity using the material 
on the system or network is infringing; 

(ii) in the absence of such actual knowledge, is not aware of facts or circumstances 
from which infringing activity is apparent; or 

(iii) upon obtaining such knowledge or awareness, acts expeditiously to remove, or 
disable access to, the material.... 

17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(1)(A). As previously noted, the District Court held that the statutory 
phrases “actual knowledge that the material ... is infringing” and “facts or circumstances 
from  which  infringing  activity  is  apparent”  refer  to  “knowledge  of  specific  and 
identifiable infringements.” [...] For the reasons that follow, we substantially affirm that 
holding. 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

 

 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

40  Although the parties marshal a battery of other arguments on appeal, it is the text of the 
statute  that  compels  our  conclusion.  In  particular,  we  are  persuaded  that  the  basic 
operation  of  §  512(c)  requires  knowledge  or  awareness  of  specific  infringing  activity. 
Under  §  512(c)(1)(A),  knowledge  or  awareness  alone  does  not  disqualify  the  service 
provider;  rather,  the  provider  that  gains  knowledge  or  awareness  of  infringing  activity 
retains safe-harbor protection if it “acts expeditiously to remove, or disable access to, the 
material.” 17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(1)(A)(iii). Thus, the nature of the removal obligation itself 
contemplates knowledge or awareness of specific infringing material, because expeditious 
removal is possible only if the service provider knows with particularity which items to 
remove. Indeed, to require expeditious removal in the absence of specific knowledge [676 
F.3d  31]  or  awareness  would  be  to  mandate  an  amorphous  obligation  to  “take 
commercially reasonable steps” in response to a generalized awareness of infringement. 
[...]  Such  a  view  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  language  of  the  statute,  which  requires 
“expeditious[  ]”  action  to  remove  or  disable  “  the  material  ”  at  issue.  17  U.S.C.  § 
512(c)(1)(A)(iii) (emphasis added). 

41  On  appeal,  the  plaintiffs  dispute  this  conclusion  by  drawing  our  attention  to  § 
512(c)(1)(A)(ii),  the  so-called  “red  flag”  knowledge  provision.  See  id.  §  512(c)(1)(A)(ii) 
(limiting liability where, “in the absence of such actual knowledge, [the service provider] is 
not aware of facts or circumstances from which infringing activity is apparent”). In their 
view, the use of the phrase “facts or circumstances” demonstrates that Congress did not 
intend  to  limit  the  red  flag  provision  to  a  particular  type  of  knowledge.  The  plaintiffs 
contend  that  requiring  awareness  of  specific  infringements  in  order  to  establish 
“aware[ness]  of  facts  or  circumstances  from  which  infringing  activity  is  apparent,”  17 
U.S.C.  §  512(c)(1)(A)(ii),  renders  the  red  flag  provision  superfluous,  because  that 
provision would be satisfied only when the “actual knowledge” provision is also satisfied. 
For that reason, the plaintiffs urge the Court to hold that the red flag provision “requires 
less specificity” than the actual knowledge provision. [...] 

42  This argument misconstrues the relationship between “actual” knowledge and “red flag” 
knowledge.  It  is  true  that  “we  are  required  to  ‘disfavor  interpretations  of  statutes  that 
render language superfluous.’ ” [...] But contrary to the plaintiffs' assertions, construing § 
512(c)(1)(A)  to  require  actual  knowledge  or  awareness  of  specific  instances  of 
infringement  does  not  render  the  red  flag  provision  superfluous.  The  phrase  “actual 
knowledge,”  which  appears  in  §  512(c)(1)(A)(i),  is  frequently  used  to  denote  subjective 
belief.  [...]  By  contrast,  courts  often  invoke  the  language  of  “facts  or  circumstances,” 
which appears in § 512(c)(1)(A)(ii), in discussing an objective reasonableness standard. [...] 

43  The difference between actual and red flag knowledge is thus not between specific and 
generalized  knowledge,  but  instead  between  a  subjective  and  an  objective  standard.  In 
other  words,  the  actual  knowledge  provision  turns  on  whether  the  provider  actually  or 
“subjectively”  knew  of  specific  infringement,  while  the  red  flag  provision  turns  on 
whether the provider was subjectively aware of facts that would have made the specific 
infringement  “objectively”  obvious  to  a  reasonable  person.  The  red  flag  provision, 
because  it  incorporates  an  objective  standard,  is  not  swallowed  up  by  the  actual 
knowledge provision under our construction of the § 512(c) safe harbor. Both provisions 
do independent work, and both apply only to specific instances of infringement. 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

44  The limited body of case law interpreting the knowledge provisions of the § 512(c) safe 
harbor  comports  with  our  view  of  the  specificity  requirement.  Most  [676  F.3d  32] 
recently, a panel of the Ninth Circuit addressed the scope of § 512(c) in UMG Recordings, 
Inc.  v.  Shelter  Capital  Partners  LLC,  667  F.3d  1022  (9th  Cir.2011),  a  copyright 
infringement case against Veoh Networks, a video-hosting service similar to YouTube.[8] 
As  in  this  case,  various  music  publishers  brought  suit  against  the  service  provider, 
claiming  direct  and  secondary  copyright  infringement  based  on  the  presence  of 
unauthorized  content  on  the  website,  and  the  website  operator  sought  refuge  in  the  § 
512(c) safe harbor. The Court of Appeals affirmed the district court's determination on 
summary judgment that the website operator was entitled to safe harbor protection. With 
respect  to  the  actual  knowledge  provision,  the  panel  declined  to  “adopt[  ]  a  broad 
conception  of  the  knowledge  requirement,”  [...]  holding  instead  that  the  safe  harbor 
“[r]equir  [es]  specific  knowledge  of  particular  infringing  activity,”[...].  The  Court  of 
Appeals “reach[ed] the same conclusion” with respect to the red flag provision, noting 
that “[w]e do not place the burden of determining whether [materials] are actually illegal 
on a service provider.” [...]. 

45  Although Shelter Capital contains the most explicit discussion of the § 512(c) knowledge 

provisions, other cases are generally in accord. [...] 

46  Based on the text of § 512(c)(1)(A), as well as the limited case law on point, we affirm the 
District Court's holding that actual knowledge or awareness of facts or circumstances that 
indicate  specific  and  identifiable  instances  of  infringement  will  disqualify  a  service 
provider from the safe harbor. 

47 

2. The Grant of Summary Judgment 

48  The  corollary  question  on  appeal  is  whether,  under  the  foregoing  construction  of  § 
512(c)(1)(A), the District Court erred in granting summary judgment to YouTube on the 
record presented. For the reasons that follow, we hold that although the District Court 
correctly interpreted § 512(c)(1)(A), summary judgment for the defendants was premature. 

49 

i. Specific Knowledge or Awareness 

50  The plaintiffs argue that, even under the District Court's construction of the safe harbor, 
the  record  raises  material  issues  of  fact  regarding  YouTube's  actual  knowledge  or  “red 
flag” awareness of specific instances of infringement. To that end, the plaintiffs draw our 
attention  to  various  estimates  regarding  the  percentage  of  infringing  content  on  the 
YouTube  website.  For  example,  Viacom  cites  evidence  [676  F.3d  33]  that  YouTube 
employees conducted website surveys and estimated that 75–80% of all YouTube streams 
contained  copyrighted  material.  The  class  plaintiffs  similarly  claim  that  Credit  Suisse, 
acting  as  financial  advisor  to  Google,  estimated  that  more  than  60%  of  YouTube's 
content  was  “premium”  copyrighted  content—and  that  only  10%  of  the  premium 
content  was  authorized.  These  approximations  suggest  that  the  defendants  were 
conscious that significant quantities of material on the YouTube website were infringing. 
[...] But such estimates are insufficient, standing alone, to create a triable issue of fact as to 
whether  YouTube  actually  knew,  or  was  aware  of  facts  or  circumstances  that  would 
indicate, the existence of particular instances of infringement. 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

51  Beyond the survey results, the plaintiffs rely upon internal YouTube communications that 
do refer to particular clips or groups of clips. The class plaintiffs argue that YouTube was 
aware of specific infringing material because, inter alia, YouTube attempted to search for 
specific Premier League videos on the site in order to gauge their “value based on video 
usage.”  In  particular,  the  class  plaintiffs  cite  a  February  7,  2007  e-mail  from  Patrick 
Walker,  director  of  video  partnerships  for  Google  and  YouTube,  requesting  that  his 
colleagues calculate the number of daily searches for the terms “soccer,” “football,” and 
“Premier League” in preparation for a bid on the global rights to Premier League content. 
On  another  occasion,  Walker  requested  that  any  “clearly  infringing,  official  broadcast 
footage”  from  a  list  of  top  Premier  League  clubs—including  Liverpool  Football  Club, 
Chelsea Football Club, Manchester United Football Club, and Arsenal Football Club—be 
taken down in advance of a meeting with the heads of “several major sports teams and 
leagues.” YouTube ultimately decided not to make a bid for the Premier League rights—
but the infringing content allegedly remained on the website. 

52  The  record  in  the  Viacom  action  includes  additional  examples.  For  instance,  YouTube 
founder Jawed Karim prepared a report in March 2006 which stated that, “[a]s of today[,] 
episodes and clips of the following well-known shows can still be found [on YouTube]: 
Family Guy, South Park, MTV Cribs, Daily Show, Reno 911, [and] Dave Chapelle [sic].” 
Karim  further  opined  that,  “although  YouTube  is  not  legally  required  to  monitor 
content  ...  and  complies  with  DMCA  takedown  requests,  we  would  benefit  from 
preemptively removing content that is blatantly illegal and likely to attract criticism.” He 
also noted that “a more thorough analysis” of the issue would be required. At least some 
of  the  TV  shows  to  which  Karim  referred  are  owned  by  Viacom.  A  reasonable  juror 
could conclude from the March 2006 report that Karim knew of the presence of Viacom-
owned material on YouTube, since he presumably located specific clips of the shows in 
question before he could announce that YouTube hosted the content “[a]s of today.” A 
reasonable  juror  could  also  conclude  that  Karim  believed  the  clips  he  located  to  be 
infringing  (since  he  refers  to  them  as  “blatantly  illegal”),  and  that  YouTube  did  not 
remove the content from the website until conducting “a more thorough analysis,” thus 
exposing the company to liability in the interim. 

Furthermore, in a July 4, 2005 e-mail exchange, YouTube founder Chad Hurley sent an e-
mail  to  his  co-founders  with  the  subject  line  “budlight  commercials,”  and  stated,  “we 
need to reject these too.” Steve Chen responded, “can we please [676 F.3d 34] leave these 
in a bit longer? another week or two can't hurt.” Karim also replied, indicating that he 
“added  back  in  all  28  bud  videos.”  Similarly,  in  an  August  9,  2005  e-mail  exchange, 
Hurley  urged  his  colleagues  “to  start  being  diligent  about  rejecting  copyrighted  / 
inappropriate content,” noting that “there is a cnn clip of the shuttle clip on the site today, 
if  the  boys  from  Turner  would  come  to  the  site,  they  might  be  pissed?”  Again,  Chen 
resisted: 

but we should just keep that stuff on the site. i really don't see what will happen. 
what?  someone  from  cnn  sees  it?  he  happens  to  be  someone  with  power?  he 
happens  to  want  to  take  it  down  right  away.  he  gets  in  touch  with  cnn  legal.  2 
weeks later, we get a cease & desist letter. we take the video down. 

53 

54 

 

 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

And again, Karim agreed, indicating that “the CNN space shuttle clip, I like. we can 
remove it once we're bigger and better known, but for now that clip is fine.” 

55  Upon  a  review  of  the  record,  we  are  persuaded  that  the  plaintiffs  may  have  raised  a 
material issue of fact regarding YouTube's knowledge or awareness of specific instances 
of  infringement.  The  foregoing  Premier  League  e-mails  request  the  identification  and 
removal  of  “clearly  infringing,  official  broadcast  footage.”  The  March  2006  report 
indicates  Karim's  awareness  of  specific  clips  that  he  perceived  to  be  “blatantly  illegal.” 
Similarly, the Bud Light and space shuttle e-mails refer to particular clips in the context of 
correspondence about whether to remove infringing material from the website. On these 
facts, a reasonable juror could conclude that YouTube had actual knowledge of specific 
infringing  activity,  or  was  at  least  aware  of  facts  or  circumstances  from  which  specific 
infringing  activity  was  apparent.  See  §  512(c)(1)(A)(i)-(ii).  Accordingly,  we  hold  that 
summary  judgment  to  YouTube  on  all  clips-in-suit,  especially  in  the  absence  of  any 
detailed examination of the extensive record on summary judgment, was premature.[9] 

56  We hasten to note, however, that although the foregoing e-mails were annexed as exhibits 
to  the  summary  judgment  papers,  it  is  unclear  whether  the  clips  referenced  therein  are 
among the current clips-in-suit. By definition, only the current clips-in-suit are at issue in 
this litigation. Accordingly, we vacate the order granting summary judgment and instruct 
the District Court to determine on remand whether any specific infringements of which 
YouTube had knowledge or awareness correspond to the clips-in-suit in these actions. 

57 

ii. “Willful Blindness” 

58  The plaintiffs further argue that the District Court erred in granting summary judgment 
to  the  defendants  despite  evidence  that  YouTube  was  “willfully  blind”  to  specific 
infringing  activity.  On  this  issue  of  first  impression,  we  consider  the  application  of  the 
common law willful blindness doctrine in the DMCA context. 

59 

 “The  principle  that  willful  blindness  is  tantamount  to  knowledge  is  hardly  novel.” 
Tiffany (NJ) Inc. v. eBay, Inc., 600 F.3d 93, 110 n. 16 (2d Cir.2010) (collecting [676 F.3d 
35]  cases);  see  In  re  Aimster  Copyright  Litig.,  33,4  F.3d  643  (7th  Cir.2003)  (“Willful 
blindness  is  knowledge,  in  copyright  law  ...  as  it  is  in  the  law  generally.”).  A  person  is 
“willfully blind” or engages in “conscious avoidance” amounting to knowledge where the 
person “ ‘was aware of a high probability of the fact in dispute and consciously avoided 
confirming that fact.’ ” [...] Writing in the trademark infringement context, we have held 
that  “[a]  service  provider  is  not  ...  permitted  willful  blindness.  When  it  has  reason  to 
suspect that users of its service are infringing a protected mark, it may not shield itself 
from learning of the particular infringing transactions by looking the other way.” Tiffany, 
600 F.3d at 109. 

60  The  DMCA  does  not  mention  willful  blindness.  As  a  general  matter,  we  interpret  a 
statute  to  abrogate  a  common  law  principle  only  if  the  statute  “speak[s]  directly  to  the 
question addressed by the common law.” [...] The relevant question, therefore, is whether 
the  DMCA  “speak[s]  directly”  to  the  principle  of  willful  blindness.  [...]  The  DMCA 
provision most relevant to the abrogation inquiry is § 512(m), which provides that safe 
harbor protection shall not be conditioned on “a service provider monitoring its service 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

or affirmatively seeking facts indicating infringing activity, except to the extent consistent 
with  a  standard  technical  measure  complying  with  the  provisions  of  subsection  (i).”  17 
U.S.C. § 512(m)(1). Section 512(m) is explicit: DMCA safe harbor protection cannot be 
conditioned on affirmative monitoring by a service provider. For that reason, § 512(m) is 
incompatible with a broad common law duty to monitor or otherwise seek out infringing 
activity based on general awareness that infringement may be occurring. That fact does 
not,  however,  dispose  of  the  abrogation  inquiry;  as  previously  noted,  willful  blindness 
cannot be defined as an affirmative duty to monitor. See Aina–Marshall, 336 F.3d at 170 
(holding that a person is “willfully blind” where he “was aware of a high probability of 
the  fact  in  dispute  and  consciously  avoided  confirming  that  fact”).  Because  the  statute 
does not “speak[ ] directly” to the willful blindness doctrine, § 512(m) limits—but does 
not abrogate—the doctrine. Accordingly, we hold that the willful blindness doctrine may 
be  applied,  in  appropriate  circumstances,  to  demonstrate  knowledge  or  awareness  of 
specific instances of infringement under the DMCA. 

61  The District Court cited § 512(m) for the proposition that safe harbor protection does 
not  require  affirmative  monitoring,  [...]  but  did  not  expressly  address  the  principle  of 
willful blindness or its relationship to the DMCA safe harbors. As a result, whether the 
defendants  made  a  “deliberate  effort  to  avoid  guilty  knowledge,”  [...]  remains  a  fact 
question for the District Court to consider in the first instance on remand.[10] 

B. Control and Benefit: § 512(c)(1)(B) 

63 

 Apart from the foregoing knowledge provisions, the § 512(c) safe harbor provides that 
an  eligible  service  provider  must  “not  receive  a  financial  benefit  directly  attributable  to 
the infringing activity, in a case in which the service provider has the right and ability to 
control such activity.” 17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(1)(B). The District Court addressed this issue in 
a  single  paragraph,  quoting  from  §  512(c)(1)(B),  the  so-called  “control  and  benefit” 
provision,  and  concluding  that  “[t]he  ‘right  and  ability  to  control’  the  activity  requires 
knowledge of it, which must be item-specific.” [...] For the reasons that follow, we hold 
that  the  District  Court  erred  by  importing  a  specific  knowledge  requirement  into  the 
control and benefit provision, and we therefore remand for further fact-finding on the 
issue of control. 

64 

1. “Right and Ability to Control” Infringing Activity 

65  On appeal, the parties advocate two competing constructions of the “right and ability to 
control”  infringing  activity.  17  U.S.C.  §  512(c)(1)(B).  Because  each  is  fatally  flawed,  we 
reject both proposed constructions in favor of a fact-based inquiry to be conducted in the 
first instance by the District Court. 

66  The  first  construction,  pressed  by  the  defendants,  is  the  one  adopted  by  the  District 
Court,  which  held  that  “the  provider  must  know  of  the  particular  case  before  he  can 
control  it.”  [...]  The  Ninth  Circuit  recently  agreed,  holding  that  “until  [the  service 
provider] becomes aware of specific unauthorized material, it cannot exercise its ‘power 
or authority’ over the specific infringing item. In practical terms, it does not have the kind 
of ability to control infringing activity the statute contemplates.” [...] The trouble with this 
construction  is  that  importing  a  specific  knowledge  requirement  into  §  512(c)(1)(B) 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

renders the control provision duplicative of § 512(c)(1)(A). Any service provider that has 
item-specific knowledge of infringing activity and thereby obtains financial benefit would 
already  be  excluded  from  the  safe  harbor  under  §  512(c)(1)(A)  for  having  specific 
knowledge of infringing material and failing to effect expeditious removal. No additional 
service provider would be excluded by § 512(c)(1)(B) that was not already excluded by § 
512(c)(1)(A).  Because  statutory  interpretations  that  render  language  superfluous  are 
disfavored, [...] we reject the District Court's interpretation of the control provision. 

67  The second construction, urged by the plaintiffs, is that the control provision codifies the 
common law doctrine of vicarious copyright liability. The common law imposes liability 
for  vicarious  copyright  infringement  “[w]hen  the  right  and  ability  to  supervise  coalesce 
with  an  obvious  and  direct  financial  interest  in  the  exploitation  of  copyrighted 
materials—even  in  the  absence  of  actual  knowledge  that  the  copyright  mono  [poly]  is 
being  impaired.”  Shapiro,  Bernstein  &  Co.  v.  H.L.  Green  Co.,  316  F.2d  304,  307  (2d 
Cir.1963)[...]. To support their codification argument, the plaintiffs rely [676 F.3d 37] on a 
House Report relating to a preliminary version of the DMCA: “The ‘right and ability to 
control’ language ... codifies the second element of vicarious liability.... Subparagraph (B) 
is  intended  to  preserve  existing  case  law  that  examines  all  relevant  aspects  of  the 
relationship between the primary and secondary infringer.” H.R.Rep. No. 105–551(I), at 
26 (1998). In response, YouTube notes that the codification reference was omitted from 
the  committee  reports  describing  the  final  legislation,  and  that  Congress  ultimately 
abandoned any attempt to “embark[ ] upon a wholesale clarification” of vicarious liability, 
electing  instead  “to  create  a  series  of  ‘safe  harbors'  for  certain  common  activities  of 
service providers.” S.Rep. No. 105–190, at 19. 

68  Happily,  the  future  of  digital  copyright  law  does  not  turn  on  the  confused  legislative 
history  of  the  control  provision.  The  general  rule  with  respect  to  common  law 
codification  is  that  when  “Congress  uses  terms  that  have  accumulated  settled  meaning 
under  the  common  law,  a  court  must  infer,  unless  the  statute  otherwise  dictates,  that 
Congress means to incorporate the established meaning of those terms.” [...] Under the 
common  law  vicarious  liability  standard,  “  ‘[t]he  ability  to  block  infringers'  access  to  a 
particular environment for any reason whatsoever is evidence of the right and ability to 
supervise.’  ”  Arista  Records  LLC  v.  Usenet.com,  Inc.,  633  F.Supp.2d  124,  157 
(S.D.N.Y.2009) (alteration in original) (quoting A & M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 
F.3d 1004, 1023 (9th Cir.2001)). To adopt that principle in the DMCA context, however, 
would  render  the  statute  internally  inconsistent.  Section  512(c)  actually  presumes  that 
service providers have the ability to “block ... access” to infringing material. [...] Indeed, a 
service provider who has knowledge or awareness of infringing material or who receives a 
takedown notice from a copyright holder is required to “remove, or disable access to, the 
material” in order to claim the benefit of the safe harbor. 17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(1)(A)(iii) & 
(C). But in taking such action, the service provider would—in the plaintiffs' analysis—be 
admitting the “right and ability to control” the infringing material. Thus, the prerequisite 
to  safe  harbor  protection  under  §  512(c)(1)(A)(iii)  &  (C)  would  at  the  same  time  be  a 
disqualifier under § 512(c)(1)(B). 

69  Moreover,  if  Congress  had  intended  §  512(c)(1)(B)  to  be  coextensive  with  vicarious 

liability, “the statute could have accomplished that result in a more direct manner.” [...] 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

70 

71 

It  is  conceivable  that  Congress  ...  intended  that  [service  providers]  which  receive  a 
financial  benefit  directly  attributable  to  the  infringing  activity  would  not,  under  any 
circumstances, be able to qualify for the subsection (c) safe harbor. But if that was indeed 
their intention, it would have been far simpler and much more straightforward to simply 
say as much. [...] 

In any event, the foregoing tension—elsewhere described as a “predicament”[11] and a 
“catch22”[12]—is  sufficient  to  establish  that  the  control  provision  “dictates”  [676  F.3d 
38]  a  departure  from  the  common  law  vicarious  liability  standard[...].  Accordingly,  we 
conclude  that  the  “right  and  ability  to  control”  infringing  activity  under  §  512(c)(1)(B) 
“requires something more than the ability to remove or block access to materials posted 
on  a  service  provider's  website.”  [...]  The  remaining—and  more  difficult—question  is 
how to define the “something more” that is required. 

72  To  date,  only  one  court  has  found  that  a  service  provider  had  the  right  and  ability  to 
control  infringing  activity  under  §  512(c)(1)(B).[13]  In  Perfect  10,  Inc.  v.  Cybernet 
Ventures,  Inc.,  213  F.Supp.2d  1146  (C.D.Cal.2002),  the  court  found  control  where  the 
service  provider  instituted  a  monitoring  program  by  which  user  websites  received 
“detailed  instructions  regard[ing]  issues  of  layout,  appearance,  and  content.”  [...]  The 
service  provider  also  forbade  certain  types  of  content  and  refused  access  to  users  who 
failed to comply with its instructions. [...] Similarly, inducement of copyright infringement 
under  Metro–Goldwyn–Mayer  Studios  Inc.  v.  Grokster,  Ltd.,  545  U.S.  913,  125  S.Ct. 
2764,  162  L.Ed.2d  781  (2005),  which  “premises  liability  on  purposeful,  culpable 
expression and conduct,” [...] might also rise to the level of control under § 512(c)(1)(B). 
Both of these examples involve a service provider exerting substantial influence on the 
activities  of  users,  without  necessarily—or  even  frequently—acquiring  knowledge  of 
specific infringing activity. 

73 

75 

In  light  of  our  holding  that  §  512(c)(1)(B)  does  not  include  a  specific  knowledge 
requirement, we think it prudent to remand to the District Court to consider in the first 
instance whether the plaintiffs have adduced sufficient evidence to allow a reasonable jury 
to conclude that YouTube had the right and ability to control the infringing activity and 
received a financial benefit directly attributable to that activity. 

C. “By Reason of” Storage: § 512(c)(1) 

 The § 512(c) safe harbor is only available when the infringement occurs “by reason of 
the  storage  at  the  direction  of  a  user  of  material  that  resides  on  a  system  or  network 
controlled or operated by or for the service provider.” 17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(1). In this case, 
the District Court held that YouTube's software functions fell within the safe harbor for 
infringements that occur “by reason of” user storage. [...] For the reasons that follow, we 
affirm  that  holding  [676  F.3d  39]  with  respect  to  three  of  the  challenged  software 
functions—the  conversion  (or  “transcoding”)  of  videos  into  a  standard  display  format, 
the playback of videos on “watch” pages, and the “related videos” function. We remand 
for  further  fact-finding  with  respect  to  a  fourth  software  function,  involving  the  third-
party syndication of videos uploaded to YouTube. 

 

 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

76  As a preliminary matter, we note that “the structure and language of OCILLA indicate 
that  service  providers  seeking  safe  harbor  under  [§  ]  512(c)  are  not  limited  to  merely 
storing  material.”  [...]  The  structure  of  the  statute  distinguishes  between  so-called 
“conduit only” functions under § 512(a) and the functions addressed by § 512(c) and the 
other  subsections.  See  17  U.S.C.  §  512(n)  (“Subsections  (a),  (b),  (c),  and  (d)  describe 
separate  and  distinct  functions  for  purposes  of  applying  this  section.”).  Most  notably, 
OCILLA  contains  two  definitions  of  “service  provider.”  17  U.S.C.  §  512(k)(1)(A)-(B). 
The narrower definition, which applies only to service providers falling under § 512(a), is 
limited to entities that “offer[ ] the transmission, routing or providing of connections for 
digital online communications, between or among points specified by a user, of material 
of  the  user's  choosing,  without  modification  to  the  content  of  the  material  as  sent  or 
received.” Id. § 512(k)(1)(A) (emphasis added). No such limitation appears in the broader 
definition,  which  applies  to  service  providers—including  YouTube—falling  under  § 
512(c).  Under  the  broader  definition,  “the  term  ‘service  provider’  means  a  provider  of 
online services or network access, or the operator of facilities therefor, and includes an 
entity  described  in  subparagraph  (A).”  Id.  §  512(k)(1)(B).  In  the  absence  of  a  parallel 
limitation  on  the  ability  of  a  service  provider  to  modify  user-submitted  material,  we 
conclude  that  §  512(c)  “is  clearly  meant  to  cover  more  than  mere  electronic  storage 
lockers.” [...] 

77  The  relevant  case  law  makes  clear  that  the  §  512(c)  safe  harbor  extends  to  software 
functions performed “for the purpose of facilitating access to user-stored material.” [...] 
Two  of  the  software  functions  challenged  here—transcoding  and  playback—were 
expressly  considered  by  our  sister  Circuit  in  Shelter  Capital,  which  held  that  liability 
arising from these functions occurred “by reason of the storage at the direction of a user.” 
[...] Transcoding involves “[m]aking copies of a video in a different encoding scheme” in 
order to render the video “viewable over the Internet to most users.” [...] The playback 
process  involves  “deliver[ing]  copies  of  YouTube  videos  to  a  user's  browser  cache”  in 
response to a user request. [...] The District Court correctly found that to exclude these 
automated  functions  from  the  safe  harbor  would  eviscerate  the  protection  afforded  to 
service providers by § 512(c). [...] 

78  A similar analysis applies to the “related videos” function, by which a YouTube computer 
algorithm  identifies  and  displays  “thumbnails”  of  clips  that  are  “related”  to  the  video 
selected by the user. The plaintiffs claim that this practice constitutes content promotion, 
not “access” to stored content, and therefore falls beyond the scope of the safe harbor. 
Citing  similar  language  in  the  Racketeer  Influenced  and  Corrupt  Organizations  Act 
(“RICO”), 18 U.S.C. §§ 1961–68, and the Clayton [676 F.3d 40] Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 12 et 
seq.,  the  plaintiffs  argue  that  the  statutory  phrase  “by  reason  of”  requires  a  finding  of 
proximate causation between the act of storage and the infringing activity. [...] But even if 
the plaintiffs are correct that § 512(c) incorporates a principle of proximate causation—a 
question we need not resolve here—the indexing and display of related videos retain a 
sufficient causal link to the prior storage of those videos. The record makes clear that the 
related videos algorithm “is fully automated and operates solely in response to user input 
without  the  active  involvement  of  YouTube  employees.”  [...]  Furthermore,  the  related 
videos function serves to help YouTube users locate and gain access to material stored at 
the direction of other users. Because the algorithm “is closely related to, and follows from, 
the storage itself,” and is “narrowly directed toward providing access to material stored at 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

the direction of users,” [...] we conclude that the related videos function is also protected 
by the § 512(c) safe harbor. 

79  The final software function at issue here—third-party syndication—is the closest case. In 
or  around  March  2007,  YouTube  transcoded  a  select  number  of  videos  into  a  format 
compatible  with  mobile  devices  and  “syndicated”  or  licensed  the  videos  to  Verizon 
Wireless  and  other  companies.  The  plaintiffs  argue—with  some  force—that  business 
transactions do not occur at the “direction of a user” within the meaning of § 512(c)(1) 
when they involve the manual selection of copyrighted material for licensing to a third 
party. The parties do not dispute, however, that none of the clips-in-suit were among the 
approximately 2,000 videos provided to Verizon Wireless. In order to avoid rendering an 
advisory opinion on the outer boundaries of the storage provision, we remand for fact-
finding on the question of whether any of the clips-in-suit were in fact syndicated to any 
other third party. 

81 

1. Repeat Infringer Policy 

D. Other Arguments 

82  The class plaintiffs briefly argue that YouTube failed to comply with the requirements of 
§ 512(i), which conditions safe harbor eligibility on the service provider having “adopted 
and reasonably implemented ... a policy that provides for the termination in appropriate 
circumstances  of  subscribers  and  account  holders  of  the  service  provider's  system  or 
network  who  are  repeat  infringers.”  17  U.S.C.  §  512(i)(1)(A).  Specifically,  the  class 
plaintiffs allege that YouTube “deliberately set up its identification tools to try to avoid 
identifying infringements of class plaintiffs' works.” This allegation rests primarily on the 
assertion  that  YouTube  permitted  only  designated  “partners”  to  gain  access  to  content 
identification  tools  by  which  YouTube  would  conduct  network  searches  and  identify 
infringing material.[14] 

83  Because the class plaintiffs challenge YouTube's deployment of search technology, [676 
F.3d  41]  we  must  consider  their  §  512(i)  argument  in  conjunction  with  §  512(m).  As 
previously noted, § 512(m) provides that safe harbor protection cannot be conditioned on 
“a  service  provider  monitoring  its  service  or  affirmatively  seeking  facts  indicating 
infringing  activity,  except  to  the  extent  consistent  with  a  standard  technical  measure 
complying with the provisions of subsection (i).” 17 U.S.C. § 512(m)(1) (emphasis added). 
In  other  words,  the  safe  harbor  expressly  disclaims  any  affirmative  monitoring 
requirement—except to the extent that such monitoring comprises a “standard technical 
measure”  within  the  meaning  of  §  512(i).  Refusing  to  accommodate  or  implement  a 
“standard technical measure” exposes a service provider to liability; refusing to provide 
access to mechanisms by which a service provider affirmatively monitors its own network 
has no such result. In this case, the class plaintiffs make no argument that the content 
identification tools implemented by YouTube constitute “standard technical measures,” 
such  that  YouTube  would  be  exposed  to  liability  under  §  512(i).  For  that  reason, 
YouTube cannot be excluded from the safe harbor by dint of a decision to restrict access 
to its proprietary search mechanisms. 

 

 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

84 

85 

2. Affirmative Claims 

Finally, the plaintiffs argue that the District Court erred in denying summary judgment to 
the plaintiffs on their claims of direct infringement, vicarious liability, and contributory 
liability under Metro–Goldwyn–Mayer Studios Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 545 U.S. 913, 125 
S.Ct. 2764, 162 L.Ed.2d 781 (2005). In granting summary judgment to the defendants, the 
District  Court  held  that  YouTube  “qualif[ied]  for  the  protection  of  ...  §  512(c),”  and 
therefore  denied  the  plaintiffs'  cross-motion  for  summary  judgment  without  comment. 
[...] 

86  The  District  Court  correctly  determined  that  a  finding  of  safe  harbor  application 
necessarily protects a defendant from all affirmative claims for monetary relief. 17 U.S.C. 
§  512(c)(1)[...].  For  the  reasons  previously  stated,  further  fact-finding  is  required  to 
determine whether YouTube is ultimately entitled to safe harbor protection in this case. 
Accordingly, we vacate the order denying summary judgment to the plaintiffs and remand 
the cause without expressing a view on the merits of the plaintiffs' affirmative claims. 

88  To summarize, we hold that: 

CONCLUSION 

89 

(1)  The  District  Court  correctly  held  that  17  U.S.C.  §  512(c)(1)(A)  requires 
knowledge  or  awareness  of  facts  or  circumstances  that  indicate  specific  and 
identifiable instances of infringement; 

(2) However, the June 23, 2010 order granting summary judgment to YouTube is 
VACATED  because  a  reasonable  jury  could  conclude  that  YouTube  had 
knowledge or awareness under § 512(c)(1)(A) at least with respect to a handful of 
specific  clips;  the  cause  is  REMANDED  for  the  District  Court  to  determine 
whether  YouTube  had  knowledge  or  awareness  of  any  specific  instances  of 
infringement corresponding to the clips-in-suit; 

(3) The willful blindness doctrine may be applied, in appropriate circumstances, to 
demonstrate knowledge or awareness of specific instances of infringement under § 
512(c)(1)(A);  the  cause  is  REMANDED  for  the  [676  F.3d  42]  District  Court  to 
consider the application of the willful blindness doctrine in the first instance; 

(4)  The  District  Court  erred  by  requiring  “item-specific”  knowledge  of 
infringement  in  its  interpretation  of  the  “right  and  ability  to  control”  infringing 
activity under 17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(1)(B), and the judgment is REVERSED insofar 
as 
is 
REMANDED  for  further  fact-finding  by  the  District  Court  on  the  issues  of 
control and financial benefit; 

it  rests  on  that  erroneous  construction  of  the  statute;  the  cause 

(5)  The  District  Court  correctly  held  that  three  of  the  challenged  YouTube 
software  functions—replication,  playback,  and  the  related  videos  feature—occur 
“by reason of the storage at the direction of a user” within the meaning of 17 U.S.C. 
§  512(c)(1),  and  the  judgment  is  AFFIRMED  insofar  as  it  so  held;  the  cause  is 
REMANDED  for  further  fact-finding  regarding  a  fourth  software  function, 

Viacom v. YouTube!

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

involving the syndication of YouTube videos to third parties. 

On remand, the District Court shall allow the parties to brief the following issues, 
with  a  view  to  permitting  renewed  motions  for  summary  judgment  as  soon  as 
practicable: 

(A) Whether, on the current record, YouTube had knowledge or awareness 
of any specific infringements (including any clips-in-suit not expressly noted 
in this opinion); 

(B)  Whether,  on  the  current  record,  YouTube  willfully  blinded  itself  to 
specific infringements; 

(C)  Whether  YouTube  had  the  “right  and  ability  to  control”  infringing 
activity within the meaning of § 512(c)(1)(B); and 

(D)  Whether  any  clips-in-suit  were  syndicated  to  a  third  party  and,  if  so, 
whether such syndication occurred “by reason of the storage at the direction 
of the user” within the meaning of § 512(c)(1), so that YouTube may claim 
the protection of the § 512(c) safe harbor. 

We  leave  to  the  sound  discretion  of  the  District  Court  the  question  of  whether 
some  additional,  guided  discovery  is  appropriate  in  order  to  resolve  “(C)” 
(“[w]hether YouTube had ‘the right and ability to control’ infringing activity”), and 
“(D)”  (“[w]hether  any  clips-in-suit  were  syndicated  to  a  third  party”).  As  noted 
above,  for  purposes  of  this  case,  the  record  with  respect  to  “(A)”  (“[w]hether  ... 
YouTube  had  knowledge  or  awareness  of  any  specific  infringements”)  and  “(B)” 
(“[w]hether.  YouTube  willfully  blinded  itself  to  specific  infringements”)  is  now 
complete. 

90  Each party shall bear its own costs.[...] 

[Notes:] 

97 

98 

100 

102 

[4]  The  “Flash”  format  “is  a  highly  compressed  streaming  format  that  begins  to  play 
instantly. Unlike other delivery methods, it does not require the viewer to download the 
entire video file before viewing.” Joint App'x IV:73. 

[5]  Doctrines  of  secondary  copyright  infringement  include  contributory,  vicarious,  and 
inducement liability. See Metro–Goldwyn–Mayer Studios Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 545 U.S. 
913, 930–31, 936–37, 125 S.Ct. 2764, 162 L.Ed.2d 781 (2005).[...] 

[7] It is undisputed that all clips-in-suit had been removed from the YouTube website by 
the time of summary judgment, mostly in response to DMCA takedown notices. Viacom 
Int'l, 718 F.Supp.2d at 519.[...] 

[9]  We  express  no  opinion  as  to  whether  the  evidence  discussed  above  will  prove 
sufficient to withstand a renewed motion for summary judgment by YouTube on remand. 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

In  particular,  we  note  that  there  is  at  least  some  evidence  that  the  search  requested  by 
Walker in his February 7, 2007 e-mail was never carried out. See Joint App'x III:256. We 
also  note  that  the  class  plaintiffs  have  failed  to  identify  evidence  indicating  that  any 
infringing  content  discovered  as  a  result  of  Walker's  request  in  fact  remained  on  the 
YouTube  website.  The  class  plaintiffs,  drawing  on  the  voluminous  record  in  this  case, 
may be able to remedy these deficiencies in their briefing to the District Court on remand. 

103 

106 

[10]  Our  recent  decision  in  Tiffany  (NJ)  Inc.  v.  eBay  Inc.,  600  F.3d  93  (2d  Cir.2010), 
lends support to this result. In Tiffany, we rejected a willful blindness challenge, holding 
that although eBay “knew as a general matter that counterfeit Tiffany products were listed 
and sold through its website,” such knowledge “is insufficient to trigger liability.” Id. at 
110. In so holding, however, we rested on the extensive findings of the district court with 
respect to willful blindness. Id. (citing Tiffany (NJ) Inc. v. eBay, Inc., 576 F.Supp.2d 463, 
513 (S.D.N.Y.2008)). Thus, the Tiffany holding counsels in favor of explicit fact-finding 
on the issue of willful blindness.[...] 

[13]  Other  courts  have  suggested  that  control  may  exist  where  the  service  provider  is 
“actively  involved  in  the  listing,  bidding,  sale  and  delivery”  of  items  offered  for  sale, 
Hendrickson  v.  eBay,  Inc.,  165  F.Supp.2d  1082,  1094  (C.D.Cal.2001),  or  otherwise 
controls  vendor  sales  by  previewing  products  prior  to  their  listing,  editing  product 
descriptions,  or  suggesting  prices,  Corbis  Corp.,  351  F.Supp.2d  at  1110.  Because  these 
cases  held  that  control  did  not  exist,  however,  it  is  not  clear  that  the  practices  cited 
therein are individually sufficient to support a finding of control.[...] 

Copyright Law (Fisher 2014) 

 

Viacom v. YouTube!

