971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

Page 1

United States Court of Appeals,

Ninth Circuit.

Vanna WHITE, Plaintiff-Appellant,

v.

SAMSUNG ELECTRONICS AMERICA, INC., a New

York corporation, and David Deutsch

Associates, Inc., a New York corporation,

Defendants-Appellees.

No. 90-55840.

Argued and Submitted June 7, 1991.

Decided July 29, 1992.

As Amended Aug. 19, 1992.

Celebrity sued electronic manufacturer alleging that
its
product ads violated California Civil Code, common-law
right of publicity, and Lanham Act. The United States
District Court for the Central District of California, Ronald
S.W. Lew, J., granted summary judgment
in favor of
manufacturer on each claim. Celebrity appealed. The Court
of Appeals, Goodwin, Senior Circuit Judge, held that: (1)
robot was not celebrity's "likeness" within meaning of
California Civil Code provision authorizing award of
damages against person who knowingly uses another's
likeness for purposes of advertising without consent; (2)
issue of material fact precluded summary judgment in favor
of manufacturer on claim for violation of common-law right
of publicity; and (3) issue of fact precluded summary
judgment on Lanham Act claim.

Affirmed in part; reversed in part and remanded.

Alarcon, Circuit Judge, filed opinion concurring in part and
dissenting in part.

West Headnotes

[1] Torts
379k8.5(6) Most Cited Cases

8.5(6)

Robot with mechanical features which manufacturer used in
advertisements
to sell electronic products and which
caricatured or made impressionistic resemblance to celebrity
was not celebrity's "likeness," for purposes of action under
California Civil Code provision authorizing award of
damages against person who knowingly uses another's
likeness without consent for purposes of advertising or
selling. West's Ann.Cal.Civ.Code §§ 3344, 3344(a).

[2] Federal Civil Procedure
170Ak2515 Most Cited Cases

2515

Genuine issue of material fact as to whether manufacturer
misappropriated celebrity's identity for use in ad to sell
electronic product precluded summary judgment in favor of
manufacturer
suit alleging violation of
California common-law right of publicity; the individual
aspects of the advertisement viewed together left little doubt
about which celebrity ad was meant to depict, even though
ad did not use celebrity's name or likeness.

in celebrity's

[3] Torts
379k8.5(6) Most Cited Cases

8.5(6)

Under California law, right of publicity does not require that
appropriations
through
particular means to be actionable; it is not important how
defendant has appropriated plaintiff's identity, but whether
defendant has done so.

accomplished

identity

be

of

[4] Trade Regulation
382k722 Most Cited Cases

722

Genuine issue of material fact as to whether manufacturer's
electronic product ads created likelihood of confusion as to
celebrity's endorsement of product precluded summary
judgment in favor of manufacturer on celebrity's Lanham
Act claim. Lanham Trade-Mark Act, § 43(a), 15 U.S.C.A. §
1125(a).

[5] Trade Regulation
382k334.1 Most Cited Cases
(Formerly 382k334)

334.1

Facts relevant to likelihood of confusion for purposes of
Lanham Act claim include: strength of plaintiff's mark;
relatedness of goods; similarity of marks; evidence of actual
confusion; marketing channels used;
likely degree of
purchaser care; defendant's intent in selecting mark; and
likelihood
lines. Lanham
Trade-Mark Act, § 43(a), 15 U.S.C.A. § 1125(a).

expansion

product

of

of

[6] Trade Regulation
382k34 Most Cited Cases

34

In trademark cases involving confusion over endorsement
by celebrity plaintiff, "mark" means celebrity's persona;
"strength" of mark refers to level of recognition celebrity
enjoys among members of society. Lanham Trade-Mark
Act, § 43(a), 15 U.S.C.A. § 1125(a).

[7] Constitutional Law
92k90.3 Most Cited Cases

90.3

[7] Trade Regulation
382k375.1 Most Cited Cases
(Formerly 382k375)

375.1

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

Page 2

Manufacturer's electronic product advertisements using
female shaped robot, wearing long gown, blonde wig, large
jewelry and turning letters in what appeared to be "Wheel of
Fortune" game show set was not "parody" of advertisement
so as to be defense to trademark violation suit and protected
by First Amendment. Lanham Trade-Mark Act, § 43(a), 15
U.S.C.A. § 1125(a); U.S.C.A. Const.Amend. 1.
*1396 Blaine Greenberg, John Genga, Hill Wynne Troop &
Meisinger, Los Angeles, Cal., for plaintiff-appellant.

Anthony Liebig, Kenneth Kulzick, Liebig & Kulzick, Los
Angeles, Cal., for defendants-appellees.

Appeal from the United States District Court for the Central
District of California.

Before: GOODWIN, PREGERSON,
Circuit Judges.

and ALARCON,

The advertisement which prompted the current dispute was
for Samsung video- cassette recorders (VCRs). The ad
depicted a robot, dressed in a wig, gown, and jewelry which
Deutsch consciously selected to resemble White's hair and
dress. The robot was posed next to a game board which is
instantly recognizable as the Wheel of Fortune game show
set, in a stance for which White is famous. The caption of
the ad read: "Longest-running game show. 2012 A.D."
Defendants referred to the ad as the "Vanna White" ad.
Unlike the other celebrities used in the campaign, White
neither consented to the ads nor was she paid.

Following the circulation of the robot ad, White sued
Samsung and Deutsch in federal district court under: (1)
California Civil Code § 3344; (2) the California common
law right of publicity; and (3) § 43(a) of the Lanham Act, 15
U.S.C. § 1125(a). The district court granted summary
judgment *1397 against White on each of her claims. White
now appeals.

GOODWIN, Senior Circuit Judge:

I. Section 3344

This case involves a promotional "fame and fortune"
dispute.
In running a particular advertisement without
Vanna White's permission, defendants Samsung Electronics
America, Inc. (Samsung) and David Deutsch Associates,
Inc. (Deutsch) attempted to capitalize on White's fame to
enhance their fortune. White sued, alleging infringement of
various intellectual property rights, but the district court
granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants. We
affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.

Plaintiff Vanna White is the hostess of "Wheel of Fortune,"
one of the most popular game shows in television history.
An estimated forty million people watch the program daily.
Capitalizing on the fame which her participation in the show
has bestowed on her, White markets her identity to various
advertisers.

The dispute in this case arose out of a series of
advertisements prepared for Samsung by Deutsch. The
series ran in at
least half a dozen publications with
widespread, and in some cases national, circulation. Each of
the advertisements in the series followed the same theme.
Each depicted a current item from popular culture and a
Samsung electronic product. Each was set in the twenty-first
century and conveyed the message that
the Samsung
product would still be in use by that time. By hypothesizing
outrageous future outcomes for the cultural items, the ads
created humorous effects. For example, one lampooned
current popular notions of an unhealthy diet by depicting a
raw steak with the caption: "Revealed to be health food.
2010 A.D." Another depicted irreverent "news"-show host
Morton Downey Jr. in front of an American flag with the
caption: "Presidential candidate. 2008 A.D."

[1] White first argues that the district court erred in rejecting
her claim under section 3344. Section 3344(a) provides, in
pertinent part,
that "[a]ny person who knowingly uses
another's name, voice, signature, photograph, or likeness, in
any manner, ... for purposes of advertising or selling, ...
without such person's prior consent ... shall be liable for any
damages sustained by the person or persons injured as a
result thereof."

White argues that
the Samsung advertisement used her
"likeness" in contravention of section 3344. In Midler v.
Ford Motor Co., 849 F.2d 460 (9th Cir.1988), this court
rejected Bette Midler's section 3344 claim concerning a
Ford television commercial in which a Midler "sound-alike"
sang a song which Midler had made famous. In rejecting
Midler's claim, this court noted that "[t]he defendants did
not use Midler's name or anything else whose use is
prohibited by the statute. The voice they used was [another
person's], not hers. The term 'likeness' refers to a visual
image not a vocal imitation." Id. at 463.

features, and not,

In this case, Samsung and Deutsch used a robot with
mechanical
for example, a manikin
molded to White's precise features. Without deciding for all
purposes when a caricature or impressionistic resemblance
might become a "likeness," we agree with the district court
that the robot at issue here was not White's "likeness" within
the meaning of section 3344. Accordingly, we affirm the
court's dismissal of White's section 3344 claim.

II. Right of Publicity

[2] White next argues that the district court erred in granting
summary judgment to defendants on White's common law

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

Page 3

identity;

the plaintiff's

right of publicity claim. In Eastwood v. Superior Court, 149
Cal.App.3d 409, 198 Cal.Rptr. 342 (1983), the California
court of appeal stated that the common law right of publicity
cause of action "may be pleaded by alleging (1)
the
defendant's use of
the
(2)
appropriation of plaintiff's name or likeness to defendant's
advantage, commercially or otherwise; (3) lack of consent;
and (4) resulting injury." Id. at 417, 198 Cal.Rptr. 342
(citing Prosser, Law of Torts (4th ed. 1971) § 117, pp.
804-807). The district court dismissed White's claim for
failure to satisfy Eastwood's second prong, reasoning that
defendants had not appropriated White's "name or likeness"
with their robot ad. We agree that the robot ad did not make
use of White's name or likeness. However, the common law
right of publicity is not so confined.

The Eastwood court did not hold that the right of publicity
cause of action could be pleaded only by alleging an
appropriation of name or likeness. Eastwood involved an
unauthorized use of photographs of Clint Eastwood and of
his name. Accordingly, the Eastwood court had no occasion
to consider the extent beyond the use of name or likeness to
which the right of publicity reaches. That court held only
that the right of publicity cause of action "may be" pleaded
by alleging, inter alia, appropriation of name or likeness,
not that the action may be pleaded only in those terms.

The "name or likeness" formulation referred to in Eastwood
originated not as an element of the right of publicity cause
of action, but as a description of the types of cases in which
the cause of action had been recognized. The source of this
formulation is Prosser, Privacy, 48 Cal.L.Rev. 383, 401-07
(1960), one of the earliest and most enduring articulations of
the common law right of publicity cause of action. In
looking at the case law to that point, Prosser recognized that
right of publicity cases involved one of two basic factual
scenarios: name appropriation, and picture or other likeness
appropriation. Id. at 401-02, nn. 156-57.

Even though Prosser focused on appropriations of name or
likeness in discussing the right of publicity, he noted that
"[i]t is not impossible that there might be appropriation of
the plaintiff's identity, as by impersonation, without the use
of either his name or his likeness, and that this would *1398
be an invasion of his right of privacy." Id. at 401, n. 155.
[FN1] At the time Prosser wrote, he noted however, that
"[n]o such case appears to have arisen." Id.

FN1. Under Professor Prosser's scheme, the right
of publicity is the last of the four categories of the
right to privacy. Prosser, 48 Cal.L.Rev. at 389.

Since Prosser's early formulation, the case law has borne out
his insight that the right of publicity is not limited to the
appropriation of name or likeness. In Motschenbacher v.
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 498 F.2d 821 (9th Cir.1974),

the defendant had used a photograph of the plaintiff's race
car
in a television commercial. Although the plaintiff
appeared driving the car in the photograph, his features were
not visible. Even though the defendant had not appropriated
the plaintiff's name or likeness, this court held that plaintiff's
California right of publicity claim should reach the jury.

In Midler, this court held that, even though the defendants
had not used Midler's name or likeness, Midler had stated a
claim for violation of her California common law right of
publicity because "the defendants ... for their own profit in
selling their product did appropriate part of her identity" by
using a Midler sound-alike. Id. at 463-64.

In Carson v. Here's Johnny Portable Toilets, Inc., 698 F.2d
831 (6th Cir.1983), the defendant had marketed portable
toilets under
the brand name "Here's Johnny"--Johnny
Carson's signature "Tonight Show" introduction--without
Carson's permission. The district court had dismissed
Carson's Michigan common law right of publicity claim
because the defendants had not used Carson's "name or
likeness." Id. at 835. In reversing the district court, the sixth
circuit found "the district court's conception of the right of
publicity ...
the right was
implicated because the defendant had appropriated Carson's
identity by using, inter alia, the phrase "Here's Johnny." Id.
at 835-37.

too narrow" and held that

[3] These cases teach not only that the common law right of
publicity reaches means of appropriation other than name or
likeness, but that the specific means of appropriation are
relevant only for determining whether the defendant has in
fact appropriated the plaintiff's identity. The right of
publicity does not require that appropriations of identity be
accomplished through particular means to be actionable. It
is noteworthy that the Midler and Carson defendants not
only avoided using the plaintiff's name or likeness, but they
also avoided appropriating the celebrity's voice, signature,
and photograph. The photograph in Motschenbacher did
include the plaintiff, but because the plaintiff was not visible
the driver could have been an actor or dummy and the
analysis in the case would have been the same.

Although the defendants in these cases avoided the most
obvious means of appropriating the plaintiffs'
identities,
each of their actions directly implicated the commercial
interests which the right of publicity is designed to protect.
As the Carson court explained:

[t]he right of publicity has developed to protect
the
commercial interest of celebrities in their identities. The
theory of the right is that a celebrity's identity can be
valuable in the promotion of products, and the celebrity
has
that may be protected from the
unauthorized commercial exploitation of that identity.... If
the celebrity's identity is commercially exploited, there

an interest

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

Page 4

has been an invasion of his right whether or not his "name
or likeness" is used.

is not

Carson, 698 F.2d at 835. It
important how the
defendant has appropriated the plaintiff's identity, but
whether the defendant has done so. Motschenbacher,
Midler, and Carson teach the impossibility of treating the
right of publicity as guarding only against a laundry list of
specific means of appropriating identity. A rule which says
that the right of publicity can be infringed only through the
use of nine different methods of appropriating identity
merely challenges the clever advertising strategist to come
up with the tenth.

*1399 Indeed, if we treated the means of appropriation as
dispositive in our analysis of the right of publicity, we
would not only weaken the right but effectively eviscerate
it. The right would fail to protect those plaintiffs most in
need of its protection. Advertisers use celebrities to promote
their products. The more popular the celebrity, the greater
the number of people who recognize her, and the greater the
visibility for the product. The identities of the most popular
celebrities are not only the most attractive for advertisers,
but also the easiest to evoke without resorting to obvious
means such as name, likeness, or voice.

the

Consider a hypothetical advertisement which depicts a
mechanical robot with male features, an African-American
complexion, and a bald head. The robot is wearing black
hightop Air Jordan basketball sneakers, and a red basketball
uniform with black trim, baggy shorts, and the number 23
(though not revealing "Bulls" or "Jordan" lettering). The ad
depicts
robot dunking a basketball one-handed,
stiff-armed, legs extended like open scissors, and tongue
hanging out. Now envision that this ad is run on television
during
Considered
individually, the robot's physical attributes, its dress, and its
stance tell us little. Taken together, they lead to the only
conclusion that any sports viewer who has registered a
discernible pulse in the past five years would reach: the ad
is about Michael Jordan.

professional

basketball

games.

of

the

aspects

individual

separately,

Viewed
the
advertisement in the present case say little. Viewed together,
they leave little doubt about the celebrity the ad is meant to
depict. The female-shaped robot is wearing a long gown,
blond wig, and large jewelry. Vanna White dresses exactly
like this at times, but so do many other women. The robot is
in the process of turning a block letter on a game-board.
Vanna White dresses like this while turning letters on a
game-board but perhaps similarly attired Scrabble-playing
women do this as well. The robot is standing on what looks
to be the Wheel of Fortune game show set. Vanna White
dresses like this, turns letters, and does this on the Wheel of
Fortune game show. She is the only one. Indeed, defendants
themselves referred to their ad as the "Vanna White" ad. We

are not surprised.

Television and other media create marketable celebrity
identity value. Considerable energy and ingenuity are
expended by those who have achieved celebrity value to
exploit it for profit. The law protects the celebrity's sole
right to exploit this value whether the celebrity has achieved
her fame out of rare ability, dumb luck, or a combination
thereof. We decline Samsung and Deutch's invitation to
permit the evisceration of the common law right of publicity
through means as facile as those in this case. Because White
has alleged facts showing that Samsung and Deutsch had
appropriated her
the district court erred by
rejecting, on summary judgment, White's common law right
of publicity claim.

identity,

III. The Lanham Act

[4] White's final argument is that the district court erred in
denying her claim under § 43(a) of the Lanham Act, 15
U.S.C. § 1125(a). The version of section 43(a) applicable to
this case [FN2] provides,
that "[a]ny
person who shall ... use, in connection with any goods or
services ... any false description or representation ... shall be
liable to a civil action ... by any person who believes that he
is or is likely to be damaged by the use of any such false
description or designation." 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a).

in pertinent part,

FN2. The statute was amended after White filed
her complaint. The amendments would not have
altered the analysis in this case however.

To prevail on her Lanham Act claim, White is required to
show that in running the robot ad, Samsung and Deutsch
created a likelihood of confusion, Academy of Motion
Picture Arts v. Creative House, 944 F.2d 1446, 1454 (9th
Cir.1991); Toho Co. Ltd. v. Sears Roebuck & Co., 645 F.2d
788, 790 (9th Cir.1981) *1400New West Corp. v. NYM Co.
of California, 595 F.2d 1194, 1201 (9th Cir.1979), over
whether White was endorsing Samsung's VCRs. HMH
Publishing Co. v. Brincat, 504 F.2d 713 (9th Cir.1974);
612
Allen
(D.C.N.Y.1985).

v. National Video,

610 F.Supp.

Inc.,

[5] This circuit recognizes several different multi-factor
tests for determining whether a likelihood of confusion
exists. See Academy, 944 F.2d at 1454, n. 3. None of these
tests is correct
to the exclusion of the others. Eclipse
Associates Ltd. v. Data General Corp., 894 F.2d 1114, 1118
(9th Cir.1990). Normally, in reviewing the district court's
decision, this court will look to the particular test that the
district court used. Academy, 944 F.2d at 1454, n. 3;
Eclipse, 894 F.2d at 1117-1118. However, because the
district court in this case apparently did not use any of the
multi-factor tests in making its likelihood of confusion
determination, and because this case involves an appeal

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

from summary judgment and we review de novo the district
court's determination, we will look for guidance to the 8-
factor test enunciated in AMF, Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599
F.2d 341 (9th Cir.1979). According to AMF, factors relevant
to a likelihood of confusion include:
(1) strength of the plaintiff's mark;
(2) relatedness of the goods;
(3) similarity of the marks;
(4) evidence of actual confusion;
(5) marketing channels used;
(6) likely degree of purchaser care;
(7) defendant's intent in selecting the mark;
(8) likelihood of expansion of the product lines.

599 F.2d at 348-49. We turn now to consider White's claim
in light of each factor.

[6] In cases involving confusion over endorsement by a
celebrity plaintiff, "mark" means the celebrity's persona. See
Allen, 610 F.Supp. at 627. The "strength" of the mark refers
to the level of recognition the celebrity enjoys among
members of society. See Academy, 944 F.2d at 1455. If
Vanna White is unknown to the segment of the public at
whom Samsung's robot ad was directed, then that segment
could not be confused as to whether she was endorsing
Samsung VCRs. Conversely, if White is well-known, this
would allow the possibility of a likelihood of confusion. For
the purposes of the Sleekcraft
test, White's "mark," or
celebrity identity, is strong.

In cases concerning confusion over celebrity endorsement,
the plaintiff's "goods" concern the reasons for or source of
the plaintiff's fame. Because White's fame is based on her
televised performances, her "goods" are closely related to
Samsung's VCRs.
reinforced the
relationship by informing its readers that they would be
taping the "longest-running game show" on Samsung's
VCRs well into the future.

the ad itself

Indeed,

The third factor, "similarity of the marks," both supports and
contradicts a finding of likelihood of confusion. On the one
hand, all of the aspects of the robot ad identify White; on
the other, the figure is quite clearly a robot, not a human.
This ambiguity means that we must look to the other factors
for resolution.

The fourth factor does not favor White's claim because she
has presented no evidence of actual confusion.

Fifth, however, White has appeared in the same stance as
the robot from the ad in numerous magazines, including the
covers of some. Magazines were used as the marketing
channels for
the robot ad. This factor cuts toward a
likelihood of confusion.

Sixth, consumers are not likely to be particularly careful in
determining who endorses VCRs, making confusion as to

Page 5

their endorsement more likely.

in running the robot ad,

Concerning the seventh factor, "defendant's intent," the
district court found that,
the
defendants had intended a spoof of the "Wheel of Fortune."
The relevant question is whether the defendants "intended to
profit by confusing consumers" concerning the endorsement
of Samsung VCRs. Toho, 645 F.2d 788. We do not disagree
that defendants intended to spoof Vanna White and "Wheel
of Fortune." That does not preclude, however,
the
possibility that defendants also *1401 intended to confuse
consumers regarding endorsement. The robot ad was one of
a series of ads run by defendants which followed the same
theme. Another ad in the series depicted Morton Downey Jr.
as a presidential candidate in the year 2008. Doubtless,
defendants intended to spoof presidential elections and Mr.
Downey through this ad. Consumers, however, would likely
believe, and would be correct in so believing, that Mr.
Downey was paid for his permission and was endorsing
Samsung products. Looking at the series of advertisements
as a whole, a jury could reasonably conclude that beneath
the surface humor of the series lay an intent to persuade
consumers
like celebrity
that celebrity Vanna White,
Downey, was endorsing Samsung products.

Finally, the eighth factor, "likelihood of expansion of the
product
lines," does not appear apposite to a celebrity
endorsement case such as this.

Application of the Sleekcraft factors to this case indicates
that the district court erred in rejecting White's Lanham Act
claim at the summary judgment stage. In so concluding, we
emphasize two facts, however. First, construing the motion
papers in White's favor, as we must, we hold only that
White has raised a genuine issue of material fact concerning
a likelihood of confusion as to her endorsement. Cohen v.
Paramount Pictures Corp., 845 F.2d 851, 852-53 (9th
Cir.1988). Whether White's Lanham Act claim should
succeed is a matter for the jury. Second, we stress that we
reach this conclusion in light of the peculiar facts of this
case. In particular, we note that the robot ad identifies White
and was part of a series of ads in which other celebrities
participated and were paid for
their endorsement of
Samsung's products.

IV. The Parody Defense

[7] In defense, defendants cite a number of cases for the
proposition that their robot ad constituted protected speech.
The only cases they cite which are even remotely relevant to
this case are Hustler Magazine v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46, 108
S.Ct. 876, 99 L.Ed.2d 41 (1988) and L.L. Bean, Inc. v.
Drake Publishers, Inc., 811 F.2d 26 (1st Cir.1987). Those
cases involved parodies of advertisements run for
the
purpose of poking fun at Jerry Falwell and L.L. Bean,
respectively. This case involves a true advertisement run for

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

Page 6

the purpose of selling Samsung VCRs. The ad's spoof of
Vanna White and Wheel of Fortune is subservient and only
tangentially related to the ad's primary message: "buy
Samsung VCRs." Defendants' parody arguments are better
addressed
[FN3] The
difference between a "parody" and a "knock-off" is the
difference between fun and profit.

non-commercial

parodies.

to

evoke
effective

the advertisement.

advertisement must

the
identity. The more
the better

FN3. In warning of a first amendment chill
to
expressive conduct, the dissent reads this decision
too broadly. See Dissent at 1407. This case
concerns only the market which exists in our
society for the exploitation of celebrity to sell
products, and an attempt to take a free ride on a
celebrity's celebrity value. Commercial advertising
which relies on celebrity fame is different from
other forms of expressive activity in two crucial
ways.
First, for celebrity exploitation advertising to be
the
effective,
the
celebrity's
evocation,
If, as
Samsung claims, its ad was based on a "generic"
game-show hostess and not on Vanna White, the ad
would not have violated anyone's right of publicity,
but it would also not have been as humorous or as
effective.
Second, even if some forms of expressive activity,
such as parody, do rely on identity evocation, the
first amendment hurdle will bar most right of
publicity actions against
those activities. Cf.
Falwell, 485 U.S. at 46, 108 S.Ct. at 876. In the
case of commercial advertising, however, the first
amendment hurdle is not so high. Central Hudson
Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Comm'n of
New York, 447 U.S. 557, 566, 100 S.Ct. 2343,
2351, 65 L.Ed.2d 341 (1980). Realizing this,
Samsung attempts to elevate its ad above the status
of garden-variety commercial speech by pointing
to the ad's parody of Vanna White. Samsung's
argument
is unavailing. See Board of Trustees,
State Univ. of N.Y. v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469, 474-75,
109 S.Ct. 3028, 3031, 106 L.Ed.2d 388 (1988);
Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products Corp., 463 U.S.
60, 67-68, 103 S.Ct. 2875, 2880-81, 77 L.Ed.2d
469 (1983). Unless the first amendment bars all
right of publicity actions--and it does not, see
Zachini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co., 433
U.S. 562, 97 S.Ct. 2849, 53 L.Ed.2d 965
(1977)--then it does not bar this case.

*1402 V. Conclusion

In remanding this case, we hold only that White has pleaded
claims which can go to the jury for its decision.

AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, and
REMANDED.

ALARCON, Circuit Judge, concurring in part, dissenting in
part:

Vanna White seeks recovery from Samsung based on three
theories: the right to privacy, the right to publicity, and the
Lanham Act. I concur in the majority's conclusions on the
right to privacy. I respectfully dissent from its holdings on
the right to publicity and the Lanham Act claims.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY (CAL.CIV.CODE § 3344(a))

I.

I agree with the majority's conclusion that no reasonable
jury could find that the robot was a "likeness" of Vanna
White within the meaning of California Civil Code section
3344(a).

II.

RIGHT TO PUBLICITY

I must dissent from the majority's holding on Vanna White's
right to publicity claim. The district court found that, since
the commercial advertisement did not show a "likeness" of
Vanna White, Samsung did not
improperly use the
plaintiff's identity. The majority asserts that the use of a
likeness is not required under California common law.
According to the majority, recovery is authorized if there is
an appropriation of one's "identity." I cannot find any
holding of a California court that supports this conclusion.
Furthermore,
the majority's
finding that Vanna White's "identity" was appropriated.

the record does not support

The district court relied on Eastwood v. Superior Court, 149
Cal.App.3d 409, 198 Cal.Rptr. 342, (1983), in holding that
there was no cause of action for infringement on the right to
publicity because there had been no use of a likeness. In
Eastwood, the California Court of Appeal described the
elements of the tort of "commercial appropriation of the
right of publicity" as "(1)
the
plaintiff's identity; (2) the appropriation of plaintiff's name
or likeness to defendant's advantage, ...; (3) lack of consent;
and (4) resulting injury." Id. at 417, 198 Cal.Rptr. 342.
(Emphasis added).

the defendant's use of

All of the California cases that my research has disclosed
hold that a cause of action for appropriation of the right to
publicity requires proof of the appropriation of a name or
likeness. See, e.g., Lugosi v. Universal Pictures, 25 Cal.3d
813, 603 P.2d 425, 160 Cal.Rptr. 323 (1979) ("The so-called
right of publicity means in essence that the reaction of the
public to name and likeness ... endows the name and
likeness of
the person involved with commercially
exploitable opportunities."); Guglielmi v. Spelling-Goldberg

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

Prods., 25 Cal.3d 860, 603 P.2d 454, 457, 160 Cal.Rptr.
352, 355 (1979) (use of name of Rudolph Valentino in
fictional biography allowed); Eastwood v. Superior Court,
supra (use of photo and name of actor on cover of tabloid
newspaper); In re Weingand, 231 Cal.App.2d 289, 41
Cal.Rptr. 778 (1964) (aspiring actor denied court approval
to change name to "Peter Lorie" when famous actor Peter
Lorre objected); Fairfield v. American Photocopy Equip.
Co., 138 Cal.App.2d 82, 291 P.2d 194 (1955), later app.
158 Cal.App.2d 53, 322 P.2d 93 (1958) (use of attorney's
name in advertisement); Gill v. Curtis Publishing Co., 38
C.2d 273, 239 P.2d 630 (1952) (use of photograph of a
couple in a magazine).

the California law. The first

Notwithstanding the fact that California case law clearly
limits the test of the right to publicity to name and likeness,
the majority concludes that "the common law right of
publicity is not so confined." Majority opinion at p. 1397.
The majority relies on two factors to support its innovative
extension of
the
Eastwood court's statement of the elements was permissive
rather than exclusive. The second is that Dean Prosser, in
describing the common law right to publicity, stated that it
might be *1403 possible that the right extended beyond
name or likeness. These are slender reeds to support a
federal court's attempt to create new law for the state of
California.

is that

In reaching its surprising conclusion,
the majority has
ignored the fact that the California Court of Appeal in
Eastwood specifically addressed the differences between the
common law right to publicity and the statutory cause of
action codified in California Civil Code section 3344. The
court explained that "[t]he differences between the common
law and the statutory actions are:
(1) Section 3344,
subdivision (a) requires knowing use whereas under case
law, mistake and inadvertence are not a defense against
commercial appropriation and (2) section 3344, subdivision
(g) expressly provides that its remedies are cumulative and
in addition to any provided by law." Eastwood, 149
Cal.App.3d at n. 6, 198 Cal.Rptr. 342 (emphasis in original).
include appropriations of identity by
The court did not
means other
likeness among its list of
differences between the statute and the common law.

than name or

The majority also relies on Dean Prosser's statement that
"[i]t is not impossible that there might be an appropriation
of the plaintiff's identity, as by impersonation, without the
use of either his name or his likeness, and that this would be
an invasion of his right of privacy." Prosser, Privacy, 48
Cal.L.Rev. 383, 401 n. 155 (1960). As Dean Prosser noted,
however, "[n]o such case appears to have arisen." Id.

The majority states that the case law has borne out Dean
Prosser's insight that the right to publicity is not limited to

Page 7

name or likeness. As noted above, however, the courts of
California have never found an infringement on the right to
publicity without the use of the plaintiff's name or likeness.

The interest of the California Legislature as expressed in
California Civil Code section 3344 appears to preclude the
result reached by the majority. The original section 3344
protected only name or likeness. In 1984, ten years after our
decision in Motschenbacher v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company, 498 F.2d 821 (9th Cir.1974) and 24 years after
Prosser speculated about the future development of the law
of the right of publicity, the California legislature amended
the statute. California law now makes the use of someone's
voice or signature, as well as name or likeness, actionable.
Cal.Civ.Code sec. 2233(a) (Deering 1991 Supp.). Thus,
California,
in Motschenbacher
specifically contemplated protection for interests other than
name or likeness, but did not include a cause of action for
appropriation of another person's identity. The ancient
maxim, inclusio unius est exclusio alterius, would appear to
bar the majority's innovative extension of the right of
publicity. The clear implication from the fact
the
California Legislature chose to add only voice and signature
to the previously protected interests is that it wished to limit
the cause of action to enumerated attributes.

decision

that

after

our

The majority has focused on federal decisions in its novel
extension of California Common Law. Those decisions do
not provide support for the majority's decision.

In each of the federal cases relied upon by the majority, the
advertisement affirmatively represented that
the person
depicted therein was the plaintiff. In this case, it is clear that
a metal robot and not the plaintiff, Vanna White, is depicted
in the commercial advertisement. The record does not show
an appropriation of Vanna White's identity.

In Motschenbacher, a picture of a well-known race driver's
car,
including its unique markings, was used in an
advertisement. Id. at 822. Although the driver could be seen
in the car, his features were not visible. Id. The distinctive
markings on the car were the only information shown in the
ad regarding the identity of the driver. These distinctive
markings compelled the inference that Motschenbacher was
the person sitting in the racing car. We concluded that
"California appellate courts would ... afford legal protection
to an individual's proprietary interest in his own identity."
(Emphasis added). Because the distinctive
Id. at 825.
markings on the racing car were sufficient
to identify
Motschenbacher as the driver of the car, *1404 we held that
an issue of fact had been raised as to whether his identity
had been appropriated. Id. at 827.

In Midler v. Ford Motor Co., 849 F.2d 460 (9th Cir.1988), a
singer who had been instructed to sound as much like Bette
Midler as possible, sang a song in a radio commercial made

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

famous by Bette Midler. Id. at 461. A number of persons
told Bette Midler that they thought that she had made the
commercial. Id. at 462. Aside from the voice, there was no
information in the commercial from which the singer could
be identified. We noted that "[t]he human voice is one of the
most palpable ways identity is manifested." Id. at 463. We
held that, "[t]o impersonate her voice is to pirate her
identity," id., and concluded that Midler had raised a
question of fact as to the misappropriation of her identity.

In Carson v. Here's Johnny Portable Toilets, Inc., 698 F.2d
831 (6th Cir.1983), the Sixth Circuit was called upon to
interpret Michigan's common-law right to publicity. The
case involved a manufacturer who used the words, "Here's
Johnny," on portable toilets. Id. at 832-33. These same
words were used to introduce the star of a popular late-night
television program. There was nothing to indicate that this
use of the phrase on the portable toilets was not associated
with Johnny Carson's television program. The court found
that "[h]ere there was an appropriation of Carson's identity,"
which violated the right to publicity. Id. at 837.

The common theme in these federal cases is that identifying
characteristics unique to the plaintiffs were used in a context
in which they were the only information as to the identity of
the individual. The commercial advertisements in each case
showed attributes of the plaintiff's identities which made it
appear that the plaintiff was the person identified in the
commercial. No effort was made to dispel the impression
that the plaintiffs were the source of the personal attributes
at issue. The commercials affirmatively represented that the
plaintiffs were involved. See, e.g., Midler at 462 ("The
[Motschenbacher] ad suggested that it was he.... In the same
way the defendants here used an imitation to convey the
impression that Midler was singing for them."). The proper
interpretation of Motschenbacher, Midler, and Carson is
that where identifying characteristics unique to a plaintiff
are the only information as to the identity of the person
appearing in an ad, a triable issue of fact has been raised as
to whether his or her identity as been appropriated.

The case before this court is distinguishable from the factual
showing made in Motschenbacher, Midler, and Carson. It is
patently
commercial
advertisement that Vanna White was not being depicted. No
reasonable juror could confuse a metal robot with Vanna
White.

viewing

anyone

clear

to

the

The majority contends that "the individual aspects of the
advertisement ... [v]iewed together leave little doubt about
the celebrity the ad is meant to depict." Majority Opinion at
p. 1399. It derives this conclusion from the fact that Vanna
White is "the only one" who "dresses like this, turns letters,
and does this on the Wheel of Fortune game show." Id. In
reaching this conclusion,
the majority confuses Vanna

Page 8

White, the person, with the role she has assumed as the
current hostess on the "Wheel of Fortune" television game
show. A recognition of the distinction between a performer
and the part he or she plays is essential for a proper analysis
of the facts of this case. As is discussed below, those things
which Vanna White claims identify her are not unique to
her. They are, instead, attributes of the role she plays. The
representation of
therefore, does not
constitute a representation of Vanna White. See Nurmi v.
(C.D.Cal.1989)
Peterson,
(distinguishing between performer and role).

those attributes,

U.S.P.Q.2d

1775

10

Vanna White is a one-role celebrity. She is famous solely
for appearing as the hostess on the "Wheel of Fortune"
television show. There is nothing unique about Vanna
White or the attributes which she claims identify her.
Although she appears to be an attractive woman, her face
and figure are no more distinctive than that of other equally
comely women. She performs her *1405 role as hostess on
"Wheel of Fortune" in a simple and straight-forward
manner. Her work does not require her to display whatever
artistic talent she may possess.

it

layout,

the Wheel of Fortune

The majority appears to argue that because Samsung created
a robot with the physical proportions of an attractive
woman, posed it gracefully, dressed it in a blond wig, an
evening gown, and jewelry, and placed it on a set that
resembles
thereby
appropriated Vanna White's identity. But an attractive
appearance, a graceful pose, blond hair, an evening gown,
and jewelry are attributes
shared by many women,
especially in Southern California. These common attributes
are particularly evident among game-show hostesses,
models, actresses,
singers, and other women in the
entertainment field. They are not unique attributes of Vanna
White's identity. Accordingly, I cannot join in the majority's
conclusion that, even if viewed together, these attributes
identify Vanna White and, therefore, raise a triable issue as
to the appropriation of her identity.

The only characteristic in the commercial advertisement that
is not common to many female performers or celebrities is
the imitation of the "Wheel of Fortune" set. This set is the
only thing which might possibly lead a viewer to think of
Vanna White. The Wheel of Fortune set, however, is not an
attribute of Vanna White's identity. It
is an identifying
characteristic of a television game show, a prop with which
Vanna White interacts in her role as the current hostess. To
say that Vanna White may bring an action when another
blond female performer or robot appears on such a set as a
hostess will, I am sure, be a surprise to the owners of the
show. Cf. Baltimore Orioles, Inc. v. Major League Baseball
Players Ass'n, 805 F.2d 663 (7th Cir.1986)
to
publicity in videotaped performances preempted by
copyright of owner of telecast).

(right

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

The record shows that Samsung recognized the market
value of Vanna White's identity. No doubt the advertisement
would have been more effective if Vanna White had
appeared in it. But the fact that Samsung recognized Vanna
White's value as a celebrity does not necessarily mean that it
appropriated her identity. The record shows that Samsung
dressed a robot in a costume usually worn by television
game-show hostesses, including Vanna White. A blond wig,
and glamorous clothing are not characteristics unique to the
current hostess of Wheel of Fortune. This evidence does not
support the majority's determination that the advertisement
was meant to depict Vanna White. The advertisement was
intended to depict a robot, playing the role Vanna White
currently plays on the Wheel of Fortune. I quite agree that
anyone seeing the commercial advertisement would be
reminded of Vanna White. Any performance by another
female celebrity as a game-show hostess, however, will also
remind the viewer of Vanna White because Vanna White's
celebrity is so closely associated with the role. But the fact
that an actor or actress became famous for playing a
particular role has, until now, never been sufficient to give
the performer a proprietary interest in it. I cannot agree with
the majority that
the California courts, which have
consistently taken a narrow view of the right to publicity,
would extend law to these unique facts.

III.

THE LANHAM ACT

Vanna White's Lanham Act claim is easily resolved by
applying the proper legal standard. Vanna White seeks
damages for violation of section 43(a) of the Lanham Act.
To succeed, Vanna White must prove actual deception of
the consuming public. Harper House,
Inc. v. Thomas
Nelson, Inc., 889 F.2d 197, 208 (9th Cir.1989) (claim for
damages under section 43(a) requires showing the defendant
"actually deceived a significant portion of the consuming
public."); see also PPX Enterprises, Inc. v. Audiofidelity
Enterprises, Inc., 818 F.2d 266, 271 (2d Cir.1987) ("to
establish entitlement to damages for violation of section
43(a):
[Plaintiffs] must establish actual confusion or
deception resulting from the violation.");
J. Gilson,
Trademark Protection *1406 and Practice section 7.02[8] at
7-137 to 7-138 (1991)
show actual
deception to obtain damages under section 43(a)). Vanna
White offered no evidence that any portion of
the
consuming public was deceived. The district court was
correct in granting summary judgment on Vanna White's
Lanham Act claim.

(plaintiffs must

The majority finds that because a majority of factors set
forth in AMF, Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341 (9th
Cir.1979), favor Vanna White, the district court erred in
granting summary judgment.

Page 9

attempt

to use

The AMF test is designed to aid in determining whether two
marks are so sufficiently similar that it is likely that a
consumer would confuse them. Where the marks are so
obviously different that no confusion could possibly occur,
the test is unnecessary. That is the situation in this matter.
The
to prevent
"misappropriations" of which a court does not approve
results in the distortion of the law which makes it more
difficult to apply the law in appropriate cases. See Hanson
& Walls, Protecting Trademark Goodwill: Towards a
Federal Standard of Misappropriation, 81 Trademark Rep.
480, 511-513 (1991). This case is an example of such
distortion.

the Lanham Act

The majority assumes the conclusion that the AMF test is
designed to disclose. In repeatedly stating that the robot
"identifies" Vanna White, the majority has usurped the fact
finding function of the district court.

The majority holds that the first factor of the AMF test,
strength of the mark, weighs in Vanna White's favor. It
equates this factor with the strength of Vanna White's fame,
citing Allen v. National Video, Inc., 610 F.Supp. 612
(D.C.N.Y.1985). Allen involved a celebrity look-alike who
bore a remarkable resemblance to Woody Allen. Id. at 617.
The instant matter
that bears no
resemblance to Vanna White.

involves a robot

It is unclear whether the "mark" for which Vanna White
seeks protection is her screen image or the imitation Wheel
of Fortune. Although Vanna White is certainly famous for
being famous,
there is no evidence in the record that
consumers identify the specific characteristics at issue, i.e.,
blond hair and fancy dress, solely with Vanna White. The
majority ignores this important distinction.

has

the

over

glossed

The majority
third AMF
factor--similarity of the marks--the most important factor in
this case. The majority finds this factor "ambiguous"
because the common characteristics
"identify" Vanna
White. Majority Opinion at p. 1400. We are required,
however, to compare marks in their entirety. California
Inc. v. Loretto Winery, 774 F.2d 1451 (9th
Cooler,
Cir.1985). In this matter, the consumer is confronted with
two entities. One is Vanna White. The other is a robot. No
one could reasonably confuse the two.

has

certain

a mark

aspects. When

Certain aspects of a mark may have a greater impact than
other
salient
they are given greater weight. Country
characteristics,
Floors, Inc. v. Gepner, 930 F.2d 1056 (3d Cir.1991);
Henri's Food Products Co. v. Kraft, Inc., 717 F.2d 352 (7th
Cir.1983); Giant Food, Inc. v. Nations' Foodservice, Inc.,
710 F.2d 1565 (Fed.Cir.1983). The face of Vanna White
and the features of the robot are obviously more important
characteristics than their hair, dress, physical proportions,

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

jewelry, or the decoration of the set. Thus, the features of
the robot and Vanna White should be given great weight in
the analysis. It should be clear to anyone viewing the
commercial advertisement that the crude features of the
robot are very dissimilar to Vanna White's attractive and
human face.

The majority's analysis of the intent or seventh factor in
AMF is similarly suspect. The question presented here is
whether there is any evidence in the record that Samsung
intended to confuse consumers. It did not.

("Bagzilla" garbage bags did not

Where the circumstances are sufficient to eliminate any
likelihood of confusion, this court has repeatedly held that
there is no claim for a violation of the Lanham Act. See
Toho Co., Ltd. v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 645 F.2d 788 (9th
Cir.1981)
infringe
"Godzilla" mark); *1407Walt Disney Prods. v. Air Pi rates,
581 F.2d 751 (9th Cir.1978), cert. denied sub nom O'Neill v.
Walt Disney Prods, 439 U.S. 1132, 99 S.Ct. 1054, 59
L.Ed.2d 94 (1979) ("Silly Sympathies" in adult comic books
did not infringe on Disney's "Silly Symphonies"). The use
of a robot in the commercial advertisement makes it clear
that Vanna White did not endorse Samsung's product.

Although likelihood of confusion may usually be a factual
question, "courts retain an important authority to monitor
the outer limits of substantial similarity within which a jury
is permitted to make the factual determination whether there
is a likelihood of confusion." Warner Bros.,
Inc. v.
American Broadcasting Cos., Inc., 720 F.2d 231, 246 (2d
Cir.1983). "[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the court
is satisfied that the products or marks are so dissimilar that
no question of fact is presented." Universal City Studios,
Inc. v. Nintendo Co., Ltd., 746 F.2d 112 (2d Cir.1984).

"There is no issue for trial unless there is sufficient evidence
favoring the nonmoving party for a jury to return a verdict
for that party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S.
242, 249, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 2510, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986).
Vanna White has presented no evidence of actual deception.
Thus, she has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact
that would support her Lanham Act claim.

SAMSUNG'S FIRST AMENDMENT DEFENSE

IV.

shrift

"[t]his

case

because

The majority gives Samsung's First Amendment defense
short
true
advertisement run for the purpose of selling Samsung
VCRs." Majority opinion at p. 1401. I respectfully disagree
with the majority's analysis of this issue as well.

involves

a

The majority's attempt to distinguish this case from Hustler
Magazine v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46, 108 S.Ct. 876, 99
L.Ed.2d 41 (1988), and L.L. Bean, Inc. v. Drake Publishers,

Page 10

Inc., 811 F.2d 26 (1st Cir.1987),
is unpersuasive. The
majority notes that the parodies in those cases were made
for the purpose of poking fun at the Reverend Jerry Falwell
and L.L. Bean. But the majority fails to consider that the
defendants in those cases were making fun of the Reverend
Jerry Falwell and L.L. Bean for the purely commercial
purpose of selling soft-core pornographic magazines.

Generally, a parody does not constitute an infringement on
the original work if it takes no more than is necessary to
"conjure up" the original. Walt Disney Prods. v. Air Pirates,
581 F.2d 751, 756 (9th Cir.1978). The majority has failed to
consider these factors properly in deciding that Vanna
White may bring an action for damages solely because the
popularity of the fame show, Wheel of Fortune.

The effect of the majority's holding on expressive conduct is
difficult to estimate. The majority's position seems to allow
any famous person or entity to bring suit based on any
commercial advertisement that depicts a character or role
performed by the plaintiff. Under the majority's view of the
law, Gene Autry could have brought an action for damages
against all other singing cowboys. Clint Eastwood would be
able to sue anyone who plays a tall, soft- spoken cowboy,
unless, of course, Jimmy Stewart had not previously
enjoined Clint Eastwood. Johnny Weismuller would have
been able to sue each actor who played the role of Tarzan.
Sylvester Stallone could sue actors who play blue- collar
boxers. Chuck Norris could sue all karate experts who
skills
display
pictures. Arnold
Schwarzenegger
could sue body builders who are
compensated for appearing in public.

in motion

their

The majority's reading of the Lanham Act would provide a
basis for "commercial" enterprises to maintain an action for
section 43(a) violations even in the absence of confusion or
deception. May Black and Decker, maker of
the
"Dustbuster" portable vacuum, now sue "Bust-dusters," the
Los Angeles topless cleaning service. Can the Los Angeles
Kings hockey team state a cause of action against the City
of Las Vegas for its billboards reading "L.A. has the Kings,
but we have the Aces."

*1408 Direct competitive advertising could also be affected.
Will BMW, which advertises its automobiles as "the
ultimate driving machine," be able to maintain an action
against Toyota for advertising one of its cars as "the
ultimate saving machine"? Can Coca Cola sue Pepsi
because it depicted a bottle of Coca Cola in its televised
"taste test"? Indeed, any advertisement which shows a
competitor's product, or any recognizable brand name,
would appear to be liable for damages under the majority's
view of the applicable law. Under the majority's analysis,
even the depiction of an obvious facsimile of a competitor's
product may provide sufficient basis for the maintenance of

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

Page 11

971 F.2d 1395
23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457
(Cite as: 971 F.2d 1395)

an action for damages.

V.

CONCLUSION

The protection of intellectual property presents the courts
with the necessity of balancing competing interests. On the
one hand, we wish to protect and reward the work and
investment of those who create intellectual property. In so
doing, however, we must prevent
the creation of a
monopoly that would inhibit the creative expressions of
others. We have traditionally balanced those interests by
allowing the copying of an idea, but protecting a unique
expression of
it. Samsung clearly used the idea of a
glamorous female game show hostess. Just as clearly, it
avoided appropriating Vanna White's expression of that
role. Samsung did not use a likeness of her. The performer
depicted in the commercial advertisement is unmistakably a
lifeless robot. Vanna White has presented no evidence that
any consumer confused the robot with her identity. Indeed,
no reasonable consumer could confuse the robot with Vanna
White or believe that, because the robot appeared in the
advertisement, Vanna White endorsed Samsung's product.

I would affirm the district court's judgment in all respects.

971 F.2d 1395, 23 U.S.P.Q.2d 1583, 20 Media L. Rep. 1457

END OF DOCUMENT

Copr. © West 2004 No Claim to Orig. U.S. Govt. Works

