5/10/2017

'Wind' Book Wins Ruling In U.S. - The New York Times

BUSINESS DAY

'Wind' Book Wins Ruling In U.S.

By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK MAY 26, 2001
Correction Appended

The United States Court of Appeals in Atlanta overturned a preliminary

injunction yesterday blocking publication of ''The Wind Done Gone,'' a novel that
revisits the plantation setting of ''Gone With the Wind'' from a slave's perspective.

The ruling clears the way for publication of the book, which was suspended last
month after United States District Court Judge Charles A. Pannell Jr. concluded its
author, Alice Randall, had committed ''unabated piracy'' of Margaret Mitchell's 1936
original. The narrator of the ''The Wind Done Gone'' is half-sister to Ms. Mitchell's
heroine, Scarlett O'Hara, and daughter of her character Mammy; Ms. Randall
borrows 15 characters, several scenes and some verbatim dialogue from the original
book.

In a tersely worded two-page preliminary summary of its opinion issued just

moments after a one-hour hearing yesterday, a three-judge panel of the United
States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit called the preliminary injunction ''an
unlawful prior restraint in violation of the First Amendment.'' The panel's ruling
makes it likely the book will appear in stores within the month, before the case is
ultimately settled.

http://www.nytimes.com/2001/05/26/business/wind-book-wins-ruling-in-us.html

1/4

5/10/2017

'Wind' Book Wins Ruling In U.S. - The New York Times

Martin Garbus, a First Amendment lawyer representing trusts that own the

copyright to ''Gone With the Wind,'' said his clients would appeal the latest ruling,
seeking a new injunction or monetary damages.

The order against the book's publication set off a widespread debate over the
boundaries between intellectual property rights and freedom of expression, pitting
arguments about literary originality against claims about racial justice. It has also
stirred up criticisms about the duration of copyright laws, which Congress has
extended several times in recent years. Once expected to expire in 1993, the
copyright to ''Gone With the Wind'' will now run until 2032, 70 years after Ms.
Mitchell's death.

The legal issues at the heart of the case revolve on the permissibility of

borrowing in the name of parody or criticism. The issue is especially complicated
when the imitation serves a political purpose, entitling it to the protection of the
First Amendment. The Supreme Court has taken up the question of parody only
once, ruling that the rap group 2 Live Crew's bawdy remake of Roy Orbison's song
''Oh, Pretty Woman'' was perhaps a legitimate parody. But the court stopped short of
settling the boundaries between parody and plagiarism.

Lawyers for Ms. Randall and her publisher, the Houghton Mifflin Company,

have argued that she borrowed no more from Ms. Mitchell's book than was
necessary to effectively ridicule the racist depictions of African-Americans in a
perennially popular American icon. A long roster of prominent writers, scholars and
artists, including the novelists Toni Morrison and Harper Lee, signed statements
supporting the publication of ''The Wind Done Gone.'' Several media and technology
companies, including Dow Jones & Company, AOL Time Warner and the Microsoft
Corporation, filed briefs on Ms. Randall's behalf as well.

In response, lawyers for trusts that own Ms. Mitchell's original copyright argued

that permitting the publication of Ms. Randall's book would inspire a torrent of
unauthorized sequels masking as political commentary or adopting a new
character's perspective.

Mr. Garbus said the judges had yielded to ''political correctness'' and pressure
from the media. ''The racial issues -- namely that Margaret Mitchell's book is being

http://www.nytimes.com/2001/05/26/business/wind-book-wins-ruling-in-us.html

2/4

5/10/2017

'Wind' Book Wins Ruling In U.S. - The New York Times

attacked as racist and the fact that it is Randall, who is black, writing this -- I think
obscured the copyright issues,'' he said.

Joseph Beck, the lawyer for Houghton Mifflin, called that characterization

unfair. ''The only racial issue here is the racism in 'Gone With the Wind,' '' he said.

In their ruling yesterday, the presiding judge, Stanley Francis Birch Jr., sitting
with Judges Harlington Wood Jr. and Stanley Marcus, appeared to favor Houghton
Mifflin's position strongly. The judges ruled that ''it is manifest that the entry of a
preliminary injunction in this copyright case was an abuse of discretion,'' adding
that, ''a preliminary injunction is an extraordinary and drastic remedy.'' The judges
are expected to issue a further explanation of their opinion.

Mr. Garbus said he planned to ask the full court to overturn the ruling of its

panel. He also said he might appeal to the Supreme Court. If those appeals are not
taken up, the case will pass to the Federal District Court for a full hearing and then
presumably return to the appeals court. But the appeals are unlikely to be resolved
before the book is in stores.

Ms. Randall's book was originally scheduled for distribution in May and official
publication in June. ''It will take us a few weeks to get it into the marketplace, but we
will do it as fast as we can,'' said Wendy Strothman, publisher of Houghton Mifflin's
trade division.

Houghton Mifflin originally planned to print 25,000 copies, but is now expected
to print far more. Early review copies of Ms. Randall's book drew bids up to $400 on
the online auction service eBay before the company removed the listings at Mr.
Garbus's request.

Correction: May 28, 2001, Monday Because of an editing error, an article on

Saturday about a federal appeals court ruling that allows the publication of a
parody of ''Gone With the Wind'' misidentified one company that signed a brief
supporting the author, Alice Randall, and omitted another from the list. Along with
Dow Jones and Microsoft, the companies included CNN, but not its parent, AOL
Time Warner. The list also included The New York Times Company. Correction:
June 1, 2001, Friday An article in Business Day on Saturday about a court ruling

http://www.nytimes.com/2001/05/26/business/wind-book-wins-ruling-in-us.html

3/4

5/10/2017

'Wind' Book Wins Ruling In U.S. - The New York Times

that cleared the way for the publication of a novel that revisits the scene of ''Gone
With the Wind'' misstated the number of years that will have elapsed between the
death of the author Margaret Mitchell and the expiration of the copyright on ''Gone
With the Wind,'' in 2032. It is 83 years, not 70; Mitchell died in 1949.

© 2017 The New York Times Company

http://www.nytimes.com/2001/05/26/business/wind-book-wins-ruling-in-us.html

4/4

