FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS

FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

No. 13-55763

D.C. No.

2:11-cv-05506-

ODW-SS

OPINION

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE OF INDIA,
L.P., a California limited
partnership; BIKRAM CHOUDHURY,
an Individual,

Plaintiffs-Appellants,

v.

EVOLATION YOGA, LLC, a New
York limited liability company;
MARK DROST, an Individual; ZEFEA
SAMSON, an Individual,

Defendants-Appellees.

Appeal from the United States District Court

for the Central District of California

Otis D. Wright II, District Judge, Presiding

Argued and Submitted

May 8, 2015—Pasadena, California

Filed October 8, 2015

Before: John T. Noonan, Kim McLane Wardlaw,

and Mary H. Murguia, Circuit Judges.

Opinion by Judge Wardlaw

2

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

SUMMARY*

Copyright

Affirming the district court’s grant of partial summary
judgment, the panel held that a sequence of yoga poses and
breathing exercises was not entitled to copyright protection.

The  panel  held  that  under  17  U.S.C.  §  102(b),  the
“Sequence,” developed by Bikram Choudhury and described
in his 1979 book, Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class, was not a
proper subject of copyright protection because it was an idea,
process, or system designed to improve health, rather than an
expression  of  an  idea.    Because  the  Sequence  was  an
unprotectible  idea,  it  was  also  ineligible  for  copyright
protection as a compilation or choreographic work.

COUNSEL

Ivana  Cingel  (argued),  Carla  Christofferson  and  Daniel
Petrocelli,  O’Melveny  &  Myers  LLP,  Los  Angeles,
California, for Defendants-Appellants.

Eric R. Maier (argued) and Louis Shoch, Maier Shoch LLP,
Hermosa Beach, California, for Plaintiffs-Appellees.

Kevin  M.  Fong  and  Cydney  A.  Tune,  Pillsbury  Winthrop
Shaw Pittman LLP, San Francisco, California, for Amicus
Curiae Yoga Alliance.

   * This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court.  It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

3

OPINION

WARDLAW, Circuit Judge:

We must decide whether a sequence of twenty-six yoga
poses  and  two  breathing  exercises  developed  by  Bikram
Choudhury  and  described  in  his  1979  book,  Bikram’s
Beginning  Yoga  Class,  is  entitled  to  copyright  protection. 
This question implicates a fundamental principle underlying
constitutional  and  statutory  copyright  protection—the
idea/expression dichotomy.  Because copyright protection is
limited to the expression of ideas, and does not extend to the
ideas themselves, the Bikram Yoga Sequence is not a proper
subject of copyright protection.

I. Factual and Procedural History

The  Indian  practice and  philosophy  of  yoga  date back
thousands  of  years.    See  Linda  Sparrowe,  Yoga  9  (2002). 
Derived  from  ancient  Hindu  scriptures,  including  the
Bhagavad Gita, the practice of yoga teaches students to attain
spiritual fulfillment through control of the mind and body. 
See Stefanie Syman, The Subtle Body: The Story of Yoga in
America 4 (2010).  Yoga has evolved into a diverse set of
spiritual,  philosophical,  and  physical  disciplines.    Some
students  practice yoga  to  transcend the  physical  body  and
unite with divine powers; others focus on improving strength,
flexibility, and overall physical fitness.

The history of yoga in the United States reflects its wide-
ranging appeal.  Some of yoga’s first American adherents
included nineteenth-century transcendentalists, such as Henry
David  Thoreau  and  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  who  were
fascinated by yoga’s approach to achieving enlightenment. 

4

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

In the early twentieth century, yoga grew more popular as
scientists and physicians began to study the physical benefits
of the practice.  These physical benefits caught the attention
of Hollywood celebrities, including Gloria Swanson, Greta
Garbo, and Marilyn Monroe, who embraced yoga as a tool to
fight illness and aging.  See Pankaj Mishra, Posing as Fitness,
N.Y.  Times,  July  23,  2010.1    By  the  1960s,  Americans
increasingly  turned  to  yoga  as  a  “non-religious,  decidedly
unspiritual” form of physical exercise.  Sparrowe, supra, at
50.

In 1971, Bikram Choudhury, the “self-proclaimed ‘Yogi
to the stars,’” id. at 56, arrived in Beverly Hills, California. 
He soon became a central figure in the growing popularity of
yoga in the United States.  Born and raised in Calcutta, India,
Choudhury  began  studying  yoga  at  age  four  and  learned
hundreds of traditional Hatha yoga “asanas,” or individual
poses.  Hatha yoga places particular emphasis on the physical
components of yoga.  Choudhury developed a sequence of
twenty-six asanas and two breathing exercises, arranged in a
particular order, which he calls the “Sequence.”  See Bikram
Choudhury,  Bikram’s  Beginning  Yoga  Class  (1979). 
Choudhury opened his own studio, where he began offering
“Bikram  Yoga”  classes.    In  a  Bikram  Yoga  class,  the
Sequence is practiced over the course of ninety minutes, to a
series of instructions (the “Dialogue”), in a room heated to
105  degrees  Fahrenheit  to  simulate  Choudhury’s  native
Indian climate.

Choudhury popularized the Sequence by marketing the
many  health  and  fitness  benefits  it  provides.    Choudhury

    1 This article may be found at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/25/
books/review/Mishra-t.html.

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

5

informs prospective students that his “system of Hatha Yoga
is capable of helping you avoid, correct, cure, heal, or at least
alleviate the symptoms of almost any illness or injury.”  He
claims that he developed the Sequence after “many of years
of  research  and  verification  .  .  .  using  modern  medical
measurement techniques.”  He tells reporters that he extended
the careers of professional athletes, including Kareem Abdul-
Jabbar and John McEnroe.  This message has resonated with
an  American  audience:  as  the  complaint  in  this  action
explains, “[p]ublic demand for Bikram Yoga classes grew
steadily  once  Bikram  Yoga  participants  realized  that
Bikram’s  unique  yoga  style  and  method  offered  them
tremendous physical, mental and other benefits.”

In  1979,  Choudhury  published  the  book  Bikram’s
includes  descriptions,
Beginning  Yoga  Class,  which 
photographs,  and  drawings  of  the  Sequence’s  twenty-six
poses and two breathing exercises.  Choudhury registered the
book with the U.S. Copyright Office in 1979.  In 2002, he
also registered the “compilation of exercises” contained in the
book, using a supplementary registration form that referenced
back to the 1979 book.2

In  1994,  Choudhury  introduced  the  “Bikram  Yoga
Teacher Training Course.”  In 2002 and 2005, respectively,
Mark Drost and Zefea Samson enrolled in and successfully
completed the three-month Bikram Yoga Teacher Training

    2 Choudhury has registered several other works with the Copyright
Office,  including  Bikram’s  Beginning  Yoga  Class  (2d  ed.)  (2000),
Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class (sound cassette) (2002), Bikram’s Yoga
College  of  India  Beginning  Yoga  Dialogue  (2002),  Bikram’s  Yoga
College  of  India:  Yoga  Teacher  Training  Course:  Curriculum  Outline
(2002),  Yoga  for  Pregnancy  (2002),  Bikram’s  Advanced  Yoga  Class
(2006), and Bikram’s Yoga (2007).

6

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

course.  In 2009, Drost and Samson founded Evolation Yoga,
LLC.  Evolation Yoga offers several types and styles of yoga,
including “hot yoga,” which is similar to “Bikram’s Basic
Yoga  System.”    Evolation  acknowledges  that  hot  yoga
“includes 26 postures and two breathing exercises and is done
for 90 minutes, accompanied by a series of oral instructions,
in a room heated to approximately 105 degrees Fahrenheit.”

On July 1, 2011, Choudhury and Bikram’s Yoga College
of India, L.P. (“Choudhury”)3 filed a complaint in the Central
District  of  California  alleging,  inter  alia,  that  defendants
Evolation  Yoga,  LLC,  Mark  Drost,  and  Zefea  Samson
(“Evolation”)  infringed  “Bikram’s  Copyrighted  Works
through substantial use of Bikram’s Copyrighted Works in
and as part of Defendants’ offering  of  yoga classes.”  On
November 12, 2012, Evolation moved for partial summary
judgment as to Choudhury’s claim of copyright infringement
of the “Sequence.”  The district court granted Evolation’s
motion, ruling that the “Sequence is a collection of facts and
ideas” that is not entitled to copyright protection.  The parties
settled  all  remaining  claims  against  each  other,  and
Choudhury timely appealed as to the “Sequence.”

II.  Standard of Review

“We  review  de  novo  a  district  court’s  grant  of  partial
summary judgment, and may affirm on any ground supported
by the record.”  White v. City of Sparks, 500 F.3d 953, 955
(9th  Cir.  2007)  (citation  omitted).    “After  ‘viewing  the

      3  For  the  purposes of  this appeal,  it is not necessary  to  distinguish
between Bikram Choudhury, the individual, and Bikram’s Yoga College
of  India,  LP.    Accordingly,  we  refer  to  all  Plaintiffs-Appellants  as
Choudhury.

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

7

evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party,’
we  determine  ‘whether  there  are  any  genuine  issues  of
material fact and whether the district court correctly applied
the  relevant  substantive  law.’”    Id.  (quoting  Am.  Civil
Liberties Union of Nev. v. City of Las Vegas, 333 F.3d 1092,
1097 (9th Cir. 2003)).

III.  Discussion

Though Choudhury emphasizes the aesthetic attributes of
the Sequence’s “graceful flow,” at bottom, the Sequence is an
idea,  process,  or  system  designed  to  improve  health. 
Copyright  protects  only  the  expression  of  this  idea—the
words and pictures used to describe the Sequence—and not
the idea of the Sequence itself.  Because the Sequence is an
unprotectible idea, it is also ineligible for copyright protection
as a “compilation” or “choreographic work.”  The district
court properly granted partial summary judgment in favor of
Evolation because the Sequence is not a proper subject of
copyright.

A. The Sequence Is an Unprotectible Idea.

Section 102(a) of the Copyright Act of 1976 sets forth the
proper subjects of copyright protection.  17 U.S.C. § 102(a). 
Section 102(b) expressly excludes protection for “any idea,
procedure, process, system, method of operation,  concept,
principle, or discovery, regardless of the form in which it is
described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.” 
Id. § 102(b).  Section 102(b) codifies the “idea/expression
dichotomy,” under which “every idea, theory, and fact in a
copyrighted  work  becomes  instantly  available  for  public
exploitation at the moment of publication.”  Golan v. Holder,
132  S.  Ct.  873,  890  (2012)  (quoting  Eldred  v.  Ashcroft,

8

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

537 U.S. 186, 219 (2003)); see also Frybarger v. Int’l Bus.
Machs. Corp., 812 F.2d 525, 529 (9th Cir. 1987) (explaining
that Section 102(b) “expressly codified” this principle); H.R.
Rep. No. 94–1476, at 57 (1976) (explaining that the “purpose
[of Section 102(b)] is to restate . . . that the basic dichotomy
between expression and idea remains unchanged”).

The  idea/expression  dichotomy  has  two  constitutional
foundations: the Copyright Clause and the First Amendment. 
Under  the  Copyright  Clause,  “[t]he  primary  objective  of
copyright  is  not  to  reward  the  labor  of  authors,  but  ‘[t]o
promote the Progress of Science  and useful Arts.’”  Feist
Publ’ns,  Inc.  v.  Rural  Tel.  Serv.  Co.,  499  U.S.  340,  349
(1991) (quoting U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 8).  Thus, “[t]he
‘constitutional command’ . . . is that Congress, to the extent
it  enacts  copyright  laws  at  all,  create  a  ‘system’  that
‘promote[s] the Progress of Science.’”  Eldred, 537 U.S. at
212  (quoting  Graham  v.  John  Deere  Co.  of  Kansas  City,
383 U.S. 1, 6 (1966)).  “To this end, copyright assures authors
the right to their original expression, but encourages others to
build freely upon the ideas and information conveyed by a
work.”  Feist, 499 U.S. at 349–50.  At the same time, the
idea/expression dichotomy “strike[s] a definitional balance
between  the  First  Amendment  and  the  Copyright  Act  by
permitting free communication of facts while still protecting
an author’s expression.”  Harper & Row Publishers v. Nation
Enters., 471 U.S. 539, 556 (1985); see also Eldred, 537 U.S.
at 219 (describing the idea/expression dichotomy as a “built-
in First Amendment accommodation[]”); L.A. News Serv. v.
Tullo, 973 F.2d 791, 795 (9th Cir. 1992) (“Copyright law
incorporates  First  Amendment  goals  by  ensuring  that
copyright protection extends only to the forms in which ideas
and  information  are  expressed  and  not  to  the  ideas  and
information themselves.”); 5 Melville B. Nimmer & David

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

9

Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright § 19E.04[B] (2015) (“[F]ree
access to ideas is vital not only for copyright law but also for
the maintenance of the democratic dialogue . . . .”).

In  Baker  v.  Selden,  101  U.S.  99  (1879),  the  Supreme
Court addressed the protection copyright law provided to a
book, a classic subject of copyright protection, explaining a
system of book-keeping.  Id. at 99–100.  The Court held that
the  book’s  expression  of  the  book-keeping  system  was
protected,  but  the  system  of  book-keeping  itself  was  not
entitled  to  copyright  protection.    Id.  at  102.    The  Court
explained:

The description of the art in a book, though
entitled  to  the  benefit  of  copyright,  lays  no
foundation for an exclusive claim to the art
itself.  The object of the one is explanation;
the object of the other is use.  The former may
be secured by copyright.  The latter can only
be  secured,  if  it  can  be  secured  at  all,  by
letters-patent.

Id. at 105.

Following Baker, and recognizing this vital distinction
between ideas and expression, courts have routinely held that
the copyright for a work describing how to perform a process
does not extend to the process itself.  In Palmer v. Braun,
287 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2002), for example, the Eleventh
Circuit  held  that  meditation  exercises  described  in  a
copyrighted manual on exploring the consciousness were “a
process” unentitled to copyright protection.  Id. at 1334.  The
court explained that the “exercises, while undoubtedly the
product of much time and effort, are, at bottom,  simply a

10

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

process  for  achieving  increased  consciousness.    Such
processes,  even 
if  original,  cannot  be  protected  by
copyright.”4  Id.  Similarly, in Publications International, Ltd.
v. Meredith Corp., 88 F.3d 473 (7th Cir. 1996), the Seventh
Circuit held that recipes contained in a copyrighted cookbook
are  not  entitled  to  copyright  protection,  for  they  merely
“describe a procedure by which the reader may produce many
dishes,”  and  “there  can  be  no  monopoly  in  the  copyright
sense in the ideas for producing certain foodstuffs.”  Id. at
481.  Finally, in Seltzer v. Sunbrock, 22 F. Supp. 621 (S.D.
Cal. 1938), which predates the Copyright Act of 1976 but
applies Baker, the court held that the copyright in a manual
describing  how  to  organize  roller-skating  races  does  not
extend to the rules for the races themselves.  Id. at 630.  The
court explained, “[w]hat [the author] really composed was a
description of a system for conducting races on roller skates. 
A system, as such, can never be copyrighted.  If it finds any
protection, it must come from the patent laws.”  Id. (citing
Baker, 101 U.S. 99).

Here, we must similarly determine not the validity of a
copyright but rather its scope.5  Does Choudhury’s copyright

   4 Cf. Arica Institute, Inc. v. Palmer, 970 F.2d 1067, 1075 (2d Cir. 1992)
(holding  that  the  owner  of  copyrights  in  training  materials  describing
ancient Sufi methods to “better understand oneself and one’s interactions
with others” was judicially estopped from claiming copyright protection
for  the  program  techniques,  in  light  of  representations  in  commercial
publications that the techniques were “based upon . . . proven scientific
knowledge” and “provable in the laboratory and clinically”).

   5 As noted above, Choudhury obtained a copyright for a “compilation of
exercises”  through  his  2002  supplementary  registration  to  Bikram’s
Beginning Yoga Class, which was first published in 1979.  Choudhury
claims that the 2002 supplementary registration relates back to the 1979
registration.  In Choudhury’s view, the supplementary registration thus

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

11

protection for his 1979 book extend to the Sequence itself? 
Under the fundamental tenets of copyright law and consistent
with the precedents discussed above, the answer is no.

As Choudhury describes it, the Sequence is a “system” or
a “method” designed to “systematically work every part of
the  body,  to  give  all  internal  organs,  all  the  veins,  all  the
ligaments,  and  all  the  muscles  everything  they  need  to
maintain  optimum  health  and  maximum  function.”    In
Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class, Choudhury explains that he
“arrived at the sequence of postures” after “[researching] the
diseases and the postures and after many years of research
and  verification  .  .  .  using  modern  medical  measurement
techniques.” 
  The  book  tells  readers  that  “Bikram’s
twenty-six exercises systematically move fresh, oxygenated
blood to one hundred percent of your body, to each organ and
fiber, restoring all systems to healthy working order, just as
Nature intended. ”  Bonnie Jones Reynolds, Introduction to
Bikram’s  Beginning  Yoga  Class,  at  xi  (1979).    This  text
promises readers that Choudhury’s “system of Hatha Yoga is
capable of helping you avoid, correct, cure, heal, or at least
alleviate the symptoms of almost any illness or injury.”

Also illuminating is Choudhury’s spoken Dialogue, which
accompanies  the  Sequence.    Before  the  Sequence’s  first
breathing exercise, for example, the instructor tells students,
“[The exercise] is good for the lungs and respiratory system. 

issued within five years of first publication and therefore serves as “prima
facie evidence of the validity of the copyright.”  17 U.S.C. § 410(c).  Here,
however,  we  need  not  decide  whether  Choudhury’s  supplementary
registration is prima facie evidence of the validity of the copyright, for
even  if  it  were,  the  undisputed  facts  are  sufficient  to  overcome  any
presumption of validity.

12

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

This  exercise  expands  your  lungs  to  their  maximum
expansion capacity.  And it improves the elasticity of your
lungs.”  Before the twelfth pose, the instructor explains:

Every exercise in the world you do, you burn
energy/calories like driving a car burns gas. 
The tank is empty, you need to fill it up again. 
Hatha Yoga class is a gas station, it is the only
place  in  the  world  where  you  gain  energy
instead of burning energy.  Asana is the only
natural physical activity in the world because
it is scientific [and] with the help of science,
we can explain nature.

An  essential  element  of  this  “system”  is  the  order  in
which the yoga poses and breathing exercises are arranged. 
Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class instructs readers, “Do the
poses in the strict order given in this book.  Nothing about
Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class is haphazard.  It is designed
to scientifically warm and stretch muscles, ligaments, and
tendons  in  the  order  in  which  they  should  be  stretched.” 
Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class, supra, at xi.  For instance,
Choudhury explains, “Camel Pose (Ustrasana) stretches the
abdomen and compresses the spine; so for the next posture,
I  chose  the  Rabbit  Pose  (Sasangasana),  which  does  the
converse: stretches the back and compresses the abdomen.”6 
One  Yoga  Journal  article  explains  that  “[a]ccording  to

    6 A recent research study published in the Journal of Strength and
Conditioning  Research  further  explains  the  clinical  effects  of  the
Sequence’s composition: “The combination of rapid transition between
postures  and  environmental  heat  stress  produces  a  substantial
cardiovascular response and muscle fatigue.”  Brian L. Tracy & Cady E.F.
Hart,  Bikram  Yoga  Training  and  Physical  Fitness  in  Healthy  Young
Adults, 27 J. Strength & Conditioning Res. 822, 823 (2013).

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

13

Bikram, each posture in his series forms the perfect basis for
the next, warming and stretching the appropriate muscles,
ligaments and tendons.”  Loraine Despres, Yoga’s Bad Boy:
Bikram Choudhury, Yoga J., Aug. 28, 2007.7

Choudhury thus attempts to secure copyright protection
for a healing art: a system designed to yield physical benefits
and  a  sense  of  well-being.    Simply  put,  this  attempt  is
precluded by copyright’s idea/expression dichotomy, codified
by Section 102(b).  As the Supreme Court explained in Baker,
“Certain mixtures are found to be of great value in the healing
art.    If  the  discoverer writes  and  publishes  a  book  on  the
subject  (as  regular  physicians  generally  do),  he  gains  no
exclusive right to the manufacture and sale of the medicine;
he gives that to the public.”  101 U.S. at 102–03.  Thus, for
example, the copyright for a book describing how to perform
a complicated surgery does not give the holder the exclusive
right to perform the surgery.  Like the series of movements a
surgeon makes, the Sequence is, as Choudhury tells readers,
a  method  designed  to  “cure,  heal,  or  at  least  alleviate”
physical injuries and illness.  Monopoly protection for such
a method “can only be secured, if it can be secured at all, by
letters-patent.”    Id.  at  105;  see  also  Sega  Enters.  Ltd.  v.
Accolade,  Inc.,  977  F.2d  1510,  1526  (9th  Cir.  1992),  as
amended (Jan. 6, 1993) (“In order to enjoy a lawful monopoly
over the idea or functional principle underlying a work, the
creator of the work must satisfy the more stringent standards
imposed  by  the  patent  laws.”).    In  light  of  Baker  and  its
progeny, Choudhury’s healing methodology is not eligible for
protection by copyright.  Indeed, if it is entitled to protection

      7  This  article  may  be  located  at  http://www.yogajournal.com/
article/lifestyle/yoga-s-bad-boy-bikram-choudhury/.

14

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

at all, that protection is more properly sought through the
patent process.8

That 

the  Sequence  may  produce  spiritual  and
psychological benefits makes it no less an idea, system, or
process  and  no  more  amenable  to  copyright  protection. 
Choudhury’s personal declaration explains that the Sequence
offers “spiritual benefits” to his students and “lead[s] to a
general sense of peace and well-being that is undoubtedly of
benefit to all of us.”  Like the meditation exercises designed
to achieve greater consciousness in Braun, 287 F.3d at 1334,
the  Sequence  sets  forth  a  method  to  attain  identifiable,  if
spiritual and psychological, results: a “sense of well-being”
and “boundless energy.”  Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class,
supra, at xi.9  As such, it falls within the Copyright Act’s
definition  of  an  idea,  process,  or  system  excluded  from
copyright protection.  See 17 U.S.C. § 102(b).

Choudhury contends that the Sequence’s arrangement of
postures is “particularly beautiful and graceful.”  But beauty
is not a basis for copyright protection.  The performance of
many  ideas,  systems,  or  processes  may  be  beautiful:  a
surgeon’s  intricate  movements,  a  book-keeper’s  careful
notations, or a baker’s kneading might each possess a certain
grace  for  at  least  some  viewers.    Indeed,  from  Vermeer’s

   8 We do not opine on whether the Sequence is, in fact, patentable.

   9 Choudhury’s website features research, including a report presented at
the Anxiety and Depression Association of America Conference, which
concludes that Bikram Yoga may reduce stress, anxiety, and depression
among women at risk for mental health problems.  See Fran Lowry, Hot
Yoga Cools Anxiety, Relieves Depression, Medscape (Apr. 13, 2015),
reproduced  at  Research,  Bikram  Yoga,  http://www.bikramyoga.com/
BikramYoga/Research.php (last visited Sept. 16, 2015).

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

15

milkmaid  to  Lewis  Hine’s  power  house  mechanic,  the
individual engrossed in a process has long attracted artistic
attention.  But the beauty of the process does not permit one
who describes it to gain, through copyright, the monopolistic
power to exclude all others from practicing it.  This is true
even where, as here, the process was conceived with at least
some aesthetic considerations in mind.  Just as some steps in
a recipe may reflect no more than the author’s belief that a
particular ingredient is beautiful or that a particular cooking
technique is impressive to watch and empowering to practice,
some  elements  in  Choudhury’s  Sequence  may  reflect  his
aesthetic preferences.  Yet just like the recipe, the Sequence
remains  unprotectible  as  a  process  the  design  of  which
primarily reflects function, not expression.

In  drawing  the  “difficult”  line  between  idea  and
expression  in  this  case,  we  are  mindful  of  the  “guiding
consideration”  of  the  idea/expression  dichotomy:  “the
preservation  of  the  balance  between  competition  and
protection reflected in the patent and copyright laws.”  CDN
Inc. v. Kapes, 197 F.3d 1256, 1262 (9th Cir. 1999) (quoting
Herbert Rosenthal Jewelry Corp. v. Kalpakian, 446 F.2d 738,
742 (9th Cir. 1971)).  As in Baker, the “object” of the book
Bikram’s  Beginning  Yoga  Class  is  “explanation”:  it  tells
readers how to perform the Sequence and encourages them to
try it.  Baker, 101 U.S. at 105.  The introduction to Bikram’s
Beginning Yoga Class, for example, urges the audience to:
(i) “turn to the Contents page,” (ii) “read through the book,”
(iii) “build gradually,” and (iv) “do the poses in the strict
order given in this book.”  Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class,
supra,  at  ix–xi.    Like  a  book  explaining  “Book-keeping
Simplified,” 101 U.S. at 100, Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class
sets out to “communicate to the world the useful knowledge
which it contains.”  Id. at 103.  It invites readers to practice

16

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

the method it describes.  “But this object would be frustrated
if the knowledge could not be used without incurring the guilt
of piracy of the book.”  Id.  Consumers would have little
reason  to  buy  Choudhury’s  book  if  Choudhury  held  a
monopoly on the practice of the very activity he sought to
popularize.  Rather than “stimulat[ing] artistic creativity for
the  general  public  good,”  copyright  protection  for  the
Sequence  would  prevent  the  public  from  engaging  with
Choudhury’s idea and building upon it.  Mattel, Inc. v. MGA
Entm’t, Inc., 705 F.3d 1108, 1111 (9th Cir. 2013) (quoting
Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. Aiken, 422 U.S. 151, 156
(1975)).

B. The Sequence Is Not a Copyrightable Compilation.

Choudhury  contends  that  the  Sequence  is  entitled  to
copyright  protection  as  a  “compilation.”    Specifically,
Choudhury claims that the Sequence qualifies for copyright
protection  because  his  “selection,  coordination,  and
arrangement” of twenty-six poses and two breathing exercises
create a coherent and expressive composition.  The district
court correctly rejected this argument.

The  Copyright  Act  identifies  compilations  as  a  proper
subject  of  copyright.    Section  103  of  the  Copyright  Act
provides that “[t]he subject matter of copyright as specified
in section 102 includes compilations.”  17 U.S.C. § 103(a). 
A  “compilation” is  “a work  formed  by  the  collection  and
assembling  of  preexisting  materials  or  of  data  that  are
selected,  coordinated,  or  arranged  in  such  a  way  that  the
resulting  work  as  a  whole  constitutes  an  original  work  of
authorship.”  Id. § 101.  It essential to recognize, however,
that Section 103 complements Section 102.  Thus, while a
compilation may be eligible for copyright protection, it must

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

17

nevertheless  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Section  102.    A
compilation  must,  in  other  words,  represent  an  “original
work[]  of  authorship,”  and  “[i]n  no  case”  may  copyright
protection  “extend  to  any  idea,  procedure,  process,  [or]
system.”  Id. § 102.  The availability of copyright protection
for compilations, therefore, does not eliminate Section 102’s
categorical bar on copyright protection for ideas.

The Supreme Court addressed the relationship between
these “two well-established propositions”¯that compilations
are  eligible  for  copyright  but  facts  and  ideas  are  not¯in
Feist, 499 U.S. 340.  In Feist, the Court considered whether
the collection of names, towns, and telephone numbers in a
telephone directory is eligible for copyright protection as a
compilation.  The Court held that “[a] factual compilation is
eligible for copyright if it features an original selection or
arrangement  of  facts,  but  the  copyright  is  limited  to  the
particular  selection  or  arrangement.    In  no  event  may
copyright extend to the facts themselves.”  Id. at 350–51.

By claiming copyright protection for the Sequence as a
compilation, Choudhury misconstrues the scope of copyright
protection  for  compilations.    As  we  have  explained,  the
Sequence is an idea, process, or system; therefore, it is not
eligible  for  copyright  protection.    That  the  Sequence  may
possess many constituent parts does not transform it into a
proper subject of copyright protection.  Virtually any process
or system could be dissected in a similar fashion.  Baker’s
examples of “how-to” treatises are instructive: “A treatise on
.  .  .  the  construction  and  use  of  ploughs,  or  watches,  or
churns[,] . . . or on the mode of drawing lines to produce the
effect of perspective” would likely list the steps necessary to
perform  the  process  it  describes.    101  U.S.  at  102.    The
watchmaking treatise’s author could not claim a copyright in

18

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

labeling 

into  multiple  steps  and 

the process of making a watch, however, by breaking down
the  process 
it  a
“compilation.”  Recipes further illustrate the point: a cake
recipe  could  be  viewed  as  a  “compilation”  of  carefully
arranged and selected steps¯which may, of course, reflect
the personal preferences and tastes of the recipe’s author¯yet
the recipe would remain, in most instances, a process that is
not eligible for copyright protection.  See Meredith, 88 F.3d
at 480–81.  Likewise, Choudhury cannot obtain copyright
protection for the Sequence as a compilation by separately
identifying the poses and breathing exercises it contains.

Moreover, according to Choudhury himself, the medical
and functional considerations at the heart of the Sequence
compel  the  very  selection  and  arrangement  of  poses  and
breathing exercises for which he claims copyright protection. 
According  to  Bikram’s  Beginning  Yoga  Class,  the  “strict
order” of the poses “is designed to scientifically warm and
stretch muscles, ligaments, and tendons in the order in which
they should be stretched.”  Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class,
supra, at xi.  Read in the light most favorable to Choudhury,
the record demonstrates that the overarching reason for the
organization  of  the  poses  and  breathing  exercises  in  the
Sequence is to further the basic goals of the method: to attain
“[p]roper  weight,  muscle 
tone,  glowing  complexion,
boundless  energy,  vibrant  good  health,  and  a  sense  of
well-being.”    Id.    The  Sequence’s  composition  renders  it
more  effective  as  a  process  or  system,  but  not  any  more
suitable  for  copyright  protection  as  an  original  work  of
authorship.

It  makes  no  difference  that  similar  results  could  be
achieved through a different organization of yoga poses and
breathing exercises.  Choudhury argues that he could have

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

19

render 

chosen  from  “hundreds  of  postures”  and  “countless
arrangements of these postures” in developing the Sequence. 
But  the  possibility  of  attaining  a  particular  end  through
multiple  different  methods  does  not 
the
uncopyrightable a proper subject of copyright.  See BellSouth
Advert.  &  Publ’g  Corp.  v.  Donnelley  Info.  Publ’g,  Inc.,
999 F.2d 1436, 1443 (11th Cir. 1993) (“The relevant inquiry
[under  Feist]  is  not  whether  there  is  some  imaginable,
although manifestly less useful, method of arranging business
telephone  listings.”);  see  also  ATC  Distrib.  Grp.,  Inc.  v.
Whatever It Takes Transmissions & Parts, Inc., 402 F.3d 700,
711–12  (6th  Cir.  2005)  (“To  be  sure,  [the  publisher  of  a
catalog describing a transmission parts numbering system]
could have arranged the parts information in other ways that
were potentially less  clear or useful, but this  fact alone is
insufficient  to  demonstrate  the  creativity  necessary  for
copyright  protection.”).    Though  it  may  be  one  of  many
possible yoga sequences capable of attaining similar results,
the  Sequence  is  nevertheless  a  process  and  is  therefore
ineligible for copyright protection.10

   10 Choudhury argues that the district court granted undue deference to
a  recent  Copyright  Office  Policy  Statement  concerning  copyright
protection for yoga sequences as compilations.  See Registration of Claims
to Copyright, 77 Fed. Reg. 37605 (June 22, 2012).  In this Statement, the
Copyright Office explains that

a claim in a compilation of exercises or the selection
and  arrangement  of  yoga  poses  will  be  refused
registration. . . . The Copyright Office would entertain
a claim in the selection, coordination or arrangement of,
for instance, photographs or drawings of exercises, but
such compilation authorship would not extend to the
selection, coordination or arrangement of the exercises
themselves  that  are  depicted  in  the  photographs  or
drawings.

20

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

C. The  Sequence  Is  Not  a  Copyrightable  Choreographic

Work.

The  district  court  properly  rejected  Choudhury’s
argument that the Sequence is entitled to copyright protection
as a choreographic work.11  The 1976 Copyright Act extended
protection to “pantomimes and choreographic works,” which
were  previously  not  copyrightable.    Pub.  L.  No.  94–553,
90 Stat. 2541, 2545 (codified at 17 U.S.C. § 102(a)(4)).  In
1986,  the  Second  Circuit  observed  that  “[e]xplicit  federal
copyright  protection  for  choreography  is  a  fairly  recent
development, and the scope of that protection is an uncharted
area of the law.”  Horgan v. Macmillan, Inc., 789 F.2d 157,
160 (2d Cir. 1986).  This remains true today.

The  parties  debate 

term
“choreography,”  which  we  have  not  yet  defined  in  the
copyright  context.    Nor  did  Congress  define  the  term

the  meaning  of 

the 

Id. at 37607.  We need not decide whether the district court improperly
deferred to the Copyright Office, however, for we “may affirm on any
ground  supported  by  the  record.”    White,  500  F.3d  at  955  (citation
omitted).  The undisputed evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to
Choudhury, precludes copyright protection for the Sequence.

   11 Though not dispositive, we note that Choudhury did not register the
Sequence  as  a  choreographic  work.    Choudhury’s  Certificate  of
Registration for Bikram’s Beginning Yoga Class is for “a nondramatic
literary  work.”    When  Choudhury  tried  to  obtain  a  Certificate  of
Registration  for  the  Sequence  as  a  “work  of  performing  arts,”  the
Copyright Office denied his application.  The Copyright Office stated that
the “concept or idea for a particular manner or style of exercise is not
registrable.”  Choudhury’s subsequent supplementary registration for a
“compilation of exercises” is an extension of the original registration for
“a  nondramatic  literary  work,”  and  thus  is  itself  a  literary  work
registration.

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

21

“choreographic work[],” apparently because its meaning was
“fairly settled.”  H.R. Rep. No. 94–1476, at 53 (1976).  The
legislative  history  does  explain,  however,  that  it  is  not
“necessary  to  specify  that  ‘choreographic  works’  do  not
include social dance steps and simple routines.”  Id. at 53–54. 
The  Second  Circuit  has  relied  on  the  Compendium  of
Copyright  Office  Practices  as  persuasive  authority  and
concluded that “[c]horeography represents a related series of
dance  movements  and  patterns  organized  into  a  coherent
whole.”  Horgan, 789 F.2d at 161 (quoting U.S. Copyright
Office, Compendium II: Compendium of Copyright  Office
Practices § 450.03(a) (1984)).  The Compendium II defines
“dance”  as  “static  and  kinetic  successions  of  bodily
movement  in  certain  rhythmic  and  spatial  relationships.” 
Compendium  II,  §  450.01.12    The  “dance  movements,”
according to the Compendium II, “must be more than mere
exercises,  such  as  ‘jumping  jacks’ or  walking  steps.”    Id.
§  450.03(a).    Finally,  the  Compendium  II  explains  that
choreography  is  “usually  intended  to  be  accompanied  by
music” but “need not tell a story” and need not be presented
“before an audience.”  Id. §§ 450.01–450.02.

In  this  case, we need not  decide whether  to  adopt  the
Copyright  Office’s  definition  of  “choreographic  work”  or
fashion another on our own because all categories of works
eligible  for  copyright  protection,  including  choreographic
works, are subject to the critical requirements and limitations
of Section 102.  The beauty of this section is that it allows for

   12 This interpretation is consistent with dictionary definitions.  Webster’s
defines “choreography” as “the art of symbolically representing dancing.” 
Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary 237 (9th ed. 1987).  “Dance,”
in  turn,  is  defined  as  “a  series  of  rhythmic  and  patterned  bodily
movements usually performed to music.”  Id. at 324.

22

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

the possibility that the term “original work of authorship”
may,  as  it  has,  evolve  and  encompass  new  forms  of
expression that, like choreography, are not easily reduced to
neat definitions.  “Congress recurrently adjusts copyright law
to  protect  categories  of  works  once  outside  the  law’s
compass.”  Golan, 132 S. Ct. at 892 (listing such categories,
including  foreign  works,  dramatic  works,  photographs,
motion  pictures,  fixed  sound  recordings,  and  architectural
works).  Yet as Congress has responded to new technologies
and  evolving  understandings  of  creative  expression,  the
idea/expression  dichotomy  has  remained  firmly  in  place. 
This dichotomy, as this case illustrates, polices the uncertain
boundaries of copyrightable subject matter.

The  Sequence is  not  copyrightable  as  a  choreographic
work for the same reason that it is not copyrightable as a
compilation:  it  is  an  idea,  process,  or  system  to  which
copyright protection may “[i]n no case” extend.  17 U.S.C.
§  102(b).    We  recognize  that  the  Sequence  may  involve
“static and kinetic successions of bodily movement in certain
rhythmic  and  spatial  relationships.”    Compendium  II,
§ 450.01.  So too would a method to churn butter or drill for
oil.  That is no accident: “successions of bodily movement”
often serve basic functional purposes.  Such movements do
not become copyrightable as “choreographic works” when
they are part and parcel of a process.  Even if the Sequence
could  fit  within  some  colloquial  definitions  of  dance  or
choreography, it remains a process ineligible for copyright
protection.

The  idea/expression  dichotomy,  codified  in  Section
102(b), plays a similar role in defining the scope of protection
for a “choreographic work” as it does for compilations.  See
Feist, 499 U.S. at 350–51.  In the context of choreographic

BIKRAM’S YOGA COLLEGE V. EVOLATION YOGA

23

works, that role is essential.  Our day-to-day lives consist of
many routinized physical movements, from brushing one’s
teeth to pushing a lawnmower to shaking a Polaroid picture,
that could be (and, in two of the preceding examples, have
been13) characterized as forms of dance.  Without a proper
understanding of the idea/expression dichotomy, one might
obtain  monopoly  rights  over  these  functional  physical
sequences  by  describing  them  in  a  tangible  medium  of
expression  and  labeling  them  choreographic  works.    The
idea/expression  dichotomy  thus  ensures  that  expansive
interpretations  of  the  categories  enumerated  as  proper
subjects of copyright will, “[i]n no case,” extend copyright
protection  beyond  its  constitutional  limits.    17  U.S.C.
§ 102(b).

IV.  Conclusion

Although there is no cause to dispute the many health,
fitness, spiritual, and aesthetic benefits of yoga, and Bikram
Yoga in particular, they do not bring the Sequence into the
realm of copyright protection.  The Sequence falls squarely
within Section 102(b)’s exclusions from copyright protection,
no matter how it is labeled or how ably the label is argued. 
Therefore,  the  district  court  properly  granted  Evolation’s
motion for partial summary judgment.

AFFIRMED.

      13  See  How  To  Do  the  ‘Lawn  Mower’  (Dance),  WikiHow,
http://www.wikihow.com/Do-the-%22Lawn-Mower%22-(Dance) 
(last
visited  Sept.  16,  2015);  Shake  It  Like  a  Polaroid  Picture,  Urban
Dictionary,  http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=
shake+it+like+a+Polaroid+picture (last visited Sept. 16, 2015).

